[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 2]]
Now we shall discuss the Chapter which deals with the rites of formal initiation of a pupil into the science of Medicine (Shishyopanayaniya- madhya'yam). Such an initiation should be imparted to a student, belonging to one of the three twice-born castes such as, the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the Vaishya, and who should be of tender years, born of a good family, possessed of, a desire to learn_, strength^ energy of action, contentment, character, self-control, a good retentive me- mory, intellect, courage, purity of mind and bod)', and a simple and clear comprehension, command a clear insight into tlie things studied, and should be found to have been further graced with the necessary qualifications of thin lips, thin teeth and thin tongue, and possessed of a straight nose, large, honest, intelligent eyes, with a benign contour of the mouth, and a contented frame of mind, being pleasant in his speech and dealings, and usually painstaking in his efforts. A man possessed of contrary attributes should not be admitted into the sacred precincts of) medicine. lYlode of Initiation :— A Brahmana preceptor sliould initiate a disciple or student in the following way — A square sand cushion or platform, measuring a cubit L"hap. 11. I SUTkASTHANAM. j- f in length and breadth, should be laid out on a plot of smooth, level and sacred' ground under the benign in- fluence of any auspicious phase of the moon or astral combination such as, the "Karanam," e»tc. and in a direc- tion of the compass whifch is held most auspicious to that end. The cusliion or the jilatform should be plastered over with a solution of water and cow-dung ; and blades of Kusha grass should be strewn over it. Then the gods, the Brahmanas and the ph5''sicians should be worshipped with oblations of flowers, fried paddy, gems and sun- dried rice. Then having drawn straight lines across the Sthandilara so as to meet the top of the furthest side of the square, and having sprinkled them over with holy water, the preceptor should lay down a blade of Kusha grass tied up in the form of a knot, known as the Brahmana, along the side of the sacred cushion to his right, and kindle the sacred fire close to his seat. Then having soaked the twigs of the four sacrificial trees of Khadira, Palasha, Devadaru and Vilva, or of Vata, Oudumvara, Ashvattha and Madhuka in curd, honey and clarified butter, he should perform the rite of Homa according to the rules of a Darvi Homa ceremony^ Then libations of clarified butter should be cast into the sacrifi- cial fire with a repetition of the Maha Vyahriti Mantras preceded by the mystic Omkara. After that, libations of clarified butter should be cast into the fire in honour of each of the gods and Rishis (celestial physicians) invoked 3 1 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. 1 Chap. 11. b}^ repeating the Svaha Mantra, and the disciple should * be made to do the same. A Brahmana preceptor is competent to initiate a student belonging' to any of the three twice-born castes. A Kshatriya preceptor can initiate a student of the Kshatriya or the Vaish3'a caste, while a Vaishya preceptor can initiate a student of his own caste alone. A Shudra student of good character T.nd parentage may be initiated into the mysteries of the A5'urveda by omitting the Mantras enjoined to be recited on such an occasion. Then having thrice circumambulated the sacrificial fire, and having invoked the firegod to bear testimony to the fact, the preceptor should address the initiated dis- ciple as follows :— "Thou shalt renounce lust, anger, greed, ignorance, vanity, egotistic feelings, envy, harsh- ness, niggardliness, falsehood, idleness, ndij all acts that soil the good name of a man. In proper season thou shalt pair thy nails and clip thy hair and put on the sacred cloth, dyed brownish yellow, live the life of a truthful, self-controlled anchorite and be obedient and respectful towards thy preceptor. In sleep, in rest, or while moving about— while at meals or in studv, and in all acts "^ The libations should he oftered as follows -Svah^ (obeisance) to P,i-ahm4, Svah.4 to Praj^pati (the lord of the created beings), SvahA to Ashvins, .Svaha to Indra, Sv.nhA to Dhanvantari, Sv^hA to Bharadv^ja, and SvAh^ to A'treva. Chap. il. I SUTRASTHA'NAAl. 19 thou shalt be guided by my directions. Thcju shalt do what is pleasant and beneficial to me, otherwise thou shalt incur sin and' all thy study and knowledge shall fail to bear their wished for fruit, and thou shalt gain no feme. If I, on the other hand, treat thee unjustly even w'ith thy perfect obedience and in full conformity to the terms agreed upon, may I incur equal sin with thee, and may all my know- ledge prove futile, and never have any scope of work or display. Thou shalt help with thy professional skill and knowledge, the Brahmanas, thy elders, preceptors and friends, the indigent, the honest, the anchorites, the helpless and those who shall come to thee (from a distance;, or those who shall live close by, as well as thy relations and kinsmen [to the best of thy knowledge and ability], and thou shalt give them medicine [without charging for it any remuneration whatever], and God will bless thee for that. Thou shalt not treat medicinally a professional hunter, a fowler, a habitual sinner, or him who has been degrad- ed in life ; and even by so doing thou shalt acquire friends, fame, piety, wealth and all wished for objects in life and thy knowledge shall gain pubhcity." , Prohibited periods of the study of the Ayurveda — The day of the new moon, the : eighth day of the moon's wane, the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, as well as the corresponding days in 20 tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. I Chap. II. the brio^ht one, the day oi the tlill moon, and the meet- ings olday and night such as (morning and evening) are occasions when the study of the Ayurveda is prohibited. Similarly, a clap of thunder heard at an improper season (months of Pousha, Phalguna and Chaitra), or a Hash of lightning occurring at a' time when such pheno- mena are naturall)' rare, or an evil befalling one's country, relations, or king, should be deemed as occasions jnohibiting the study of the Ayurveda. Moreover, one should not read it in a cremation ground, nor while riding (an elephant, horse, or any) conveyance, nor in a battle-held, nor in a place of execution. A festi- ^ al or the appearance of inauspicious omens, and the days of the fortnight usually avoided by the Brahmanas in studying the Vedas, as well as an unclean state of the body, should be regarded as occasions prohibiting the studv of the Avurveda. riuis lmhIn llic sccijiul clinitlci' ul ihc .SuLiasLhanaiii in llit; SublmiUi. Sanihila which Ireals oflhc foniuil inil.i;Ui<jn of a .sUulunl intM ihc Aviiivcda.
