[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 10]]
Now we sliall discuss the Chapter wliich treats of the essential qualifications of a physician before he formally enters his profession (Vishlkha'- nupravcshaniya-madhya'yam). A physician haying thoroughly studied the Science of medicine, and fully pondered on and yerified the truths he has assimilated, both by obseryation and practice, and haying attained to that stage of (lucid kno^vledge, ^yhich ) \yould enable him to make a clear exposition of the science (^vhene^er necessary), should open his medical career conmience practising) with the permission of the king of his country. He should be cleanly in his habits and well shaAed. and should not allow his nails to grow. He should wear white garments, put on a pair of shoes, carry a stick and an umbrella in his hands, and walk about with a mild and benignani look as a friend of all created beings, read}- to help all, and frank and friendly in his talk and demeanour, and neyer allow- ing the full control of his reason or intellectual powers to be in any way disturbed or interfered with. A physician, haying met with a messenger of happy augury, or having been encouraged on his journey by the notes of auspicious birds or sights, should go to the house of his patient. [Then, haying entered the Chap. X. ] SUTRASTHANAM. >jz^ sick room], the physician should \ie\v the bod>' of his patient, touch it with his own hands, and enquire (about his complaint . SeNcral authorities hold that these three, (inspection, touch and questioning; largely form the means of our ascertaining the nature of a disease. But that is not correct, inasmuch as the five sense- organs of hearing, sight, etc. and oral enquiry material- ly contribute to a better diagnosis. Diseases, which are to be diagnosed with the help of the organ of hearing, will be fully treated, later on, in the Chapter on Vrana-Srava (secretions from an ulcer). The wind (Vayu), making the blood ebullient, forces it up with a distinctly audible report and thus affects the sense of hearing. But this will be dealt with later on in the abovesaid chapter. The heat and coldness of the body, or the gloss, roughness, hardness, or softness of the skin of the affected part as in fever, or in an oedematous swelling of the body, are perceptible by the sense of touch. Fullness or emaciation of the body (cachexia), state and indications of ^itality, strength, complexion, etc. are perceived by the sense of sight. Secretions or discharges (from the inflamed mucous membrane of the urethral in Prameha etc., should be tested with the organ of taste.* The characteristic smell emitted * The .-jwecl, ur an}' olher ta.'^lc of ihe dibcharj^eb should Ijt; inleiicd from the fad of iheir bting or not being swarmed wiili hosts of ants or flies, etc. by an ulcer in its critical stage f Arishta) should be determined with the help of the organ of smell. While such facts as the time or season (of the first appearance) of the disease, the caste which the patient belongs to, and things or measures which tend to bring about a manifest amelioration of the disease, or prove comfortable to the patient (Satm3'ami as well as the cause of the disease, the aggrava- tion of pain, the strength of the patient, and his state of digestion and appetite, the emission of stool, urine and flatus, or their stoppage, and the maturity of the disease as regards time, should be specifically ascertained by directly interrogating the patient (on those subjects). Though the abovesaid five organs of sense, like the three fundamental vital humours, help us to make the correct diagnosis of a disease, still the objects locally perceived by these senses should not be left out of account in ascertaining its specific nature. Authoritative verse on the sub- ject — A disease wrongly observed or incorrectly : described, or wrongly diagnosed, is sure to mislead a physician. Ha^'ing made these observations the physician will try to cure diseases that are curable, adopt palliative measures in cases where palliation is the only remedy that can be offered, and give up a case which is beyond Chap. X. ] SUTRASTHANAM . ^7 all medical treatment, and mosth' those which are of more than a year's standing. Diseases affecting a Br^hmana well versed in the Vedas_, or a king, or a woman, or an infant, or an old man, or a timid person, or a man in the royal service, or a cunning man, or a man who pretends to possess a knowledge of the science of medicine, or a man who conceals his disease, or a man of an excessively irascible temperament, or a man who has no control over his senses, or a man in extremely indigent cir- cumstances of life or without any one to take care of him, are apt to run into an incurable type though appearing in a common or curable form at the outset. The physician, who practises his art with a regard to these facts, acquires piety, wealth, fame and all wished for objects in life. Authoritative verse on the sub- ject — A physician should abjure the company of : women, nor should he speak in private to them or joke with them. A physician is forbidden to take anything but cooked rice from the hands of a woman. Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Sutrasthanam in the Sushruta Samhiti which treats of the essential qualifications of a physician.
