[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 7]]
C H APT E R V I I Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of Surgical Appliances, their Uses and Construction. (Yantra-VicJhimadhya'yam). Surgical instruments number one hundred and one * in all, of which the hand is the most important, inas- much as (all of them depend on the hand for • their principal auxiliary) and as none of them can be handled without it ; and further because all sur- gical operations pre-eminentlj^ require its co-operation. Any foreign or extraneous substance, which finds a lodgment in the Inunan system and becomes painful to the body and the mind alike, is called a Shalyam ; and surgical instruments are the means of extracting it (from its seat or place where it is embedded (Surgical Appliances may be divided into six different groups or types, such as the Svastika, the Sandansha, the Tala, the Nadi Yantras, and the Shalakas, besides those that are called the minor or accessory appliances (Upa^yantras). The Svastika instruments (forceps) in their turn, are divided into twenty-four sub-classes ; the Sandansha instruments (tongsi into two ; the Tala Yantras * According to certain authorities hundred is here indefinitely used for a large number. Chap. VII. ] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 5- • into two ; the Nadi Yantras tubular) into twent)^ ; and the Shalakas (bougies; into twenty-eight ; while the Upa-yantras admit of being divided into twenty- five different types. These instrumeijts are all made of iron which ma}" be substituted for any other similar or suitable substance where iron would be unavailable. The mouths of these appliances are usuall}' made to resemble those of birds and beasts, and hence they should be made to resemble the mouths of some particular animal in shape, or otherwise, according to the advice of old and experienced ph3"sicians - surgeons;, or accord- ing to the directions as laid down in the Shastras (Medical books of recognised authority, or according to the exigencies of the case, or after the shape and structure of other appliances used on similar occasions. Metrical texts: — Appliances should be made neither too large nor too small, and their mouths or edges should be made sharp and keen. They should be made with a special eye as to strength and steadiness, and they should be provided with convenient handles. Appliances of the Svastika class should be made to measure eighteen fingers in length ; and their mouths should be made to resemble those of lions, tigers, wolves, hyenas, bears, cats, jackals, deer, Erv^rukas ;a species of deer, crows, cormorants, 58 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. Vll. Kururas la species of birdi, Hasas (a species of sparrow vultures, falcons, owls, kites, herons, Bhringarajas (a species of bird , Anjalikamas, Avabhanjanas, Nandimukhas, and such like beasts and birds. The two blades or halves of a Svastika should be welded together b}- means of a bolt resembling a Masura pulse 1 lentil; in size, and the handles should be turned inward in the shape of a mace, or an Ankusha. Apph- ances of this type should be used in extracting an}' thorn or foreign matter which may have entered into the bones. Sandanshas tongs are divided into two classes as thev are soldered together with or without a bolt. They should he made to measure sixteen fingers in length, and should be used to withdraw any thorn- like substance from below the skin, tlesh_, veins or nerves. The Tala Yautras which measure twelve fingers in length, mav be divided into two classes as the siiigle Tala and the double Tala. The former resemble the scales of fish in shape, while the latter, according to certain authorities, are made to resemble the entire mouth of a fish of the Bhetuli species. These Yantras are used in extracting splinters from inside the nose, ears and other external channels or passages ot the body. The Nadi Yantras tubular instruments like syringe,s Chap. VII. ] SUTRASTHANAM. ^o enemas, etc, with a passage or aperture running through their entire .length^ are constructed in a variet}' of shapes and for various purposes. Some of them are open at one end, while others are open at both. These instruments are used for the purpose of extracting any shalyam that has pricked into the external canals or passages of the body, or for inspecting the seat of affection as in piles, etc., or for sucking (blood, etc. from any affected part , or simply as accessories to other surgical appliances. The length and circumference of a Nadi Yantra should be made to commensurate with those of the passage 'Srota'i or outlet of the human system into which it is intended to be introduced. We shall describe, later on, the types of Nadi Yantras which are to be used in connection with such diseases as fistula in ano, piles, etc. or in tumours and ulcers, in Mutradvriddhi (Hydrocele) in Niruddha Prakasha ( Phimosis ), in Niruddha Guda 'Stricture of the rectum) and in ascites, as well as those to be used for the purpose of injecting anything into the urethra, the bowels, the vagina and the uterus, or are used in connection with medicated inhalation, or with those that are known as the Alavu Yantras (gourd used for cupping). The Shalaka- Yantras bougies are of various shapes and serve a variety of purposes. The lengths and girths of these instruments should be determined 6o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. : Chap. vil. according to the necessity of each individual case. Four probes or directors shalaka in two pairs, are used for the purposes of searching Eshana pus in a suppurated part or limb, or in connection with uplifting, cutting and thereby withdrawing a shalyam from the part it has pricked into, or with a view to transfer such a body from one place to another Chalanam , or for the purpose of extracting it i Shalyam from the affected part. The mouths of the two types of these directors respectively resemble those of a Gandupada earthworm and of a Sharapunkha Tephrosia Purpurea, Pers while the other two are respectively headed like the hood of a serpent and a fish hook. A couple of directors are used for the pur- pose of withdrawing a foreign matter 'Shalyam; imbedded in any outer canal of the body (Srotas ). The top-ends of these directors are bent down a little, and they resemble a lentil seed in size. Six types of directors or probes are used in cleansing the pus from an affected part of the human organism and their top-ends are fitted ; with caps of loose cotton. The three sorts of directors used in applying alkaline medicines, are shaped like ladles, and their mouths resemble the cavities of little stone mortars (Khala.) Of the six sorts of directors used in connection with the process of cauterisation (Agni- Karma) three are mouthed like the Jamboline fruit, while the other three are faced like a mace or a spear (^Ankusha. . A kind of director used in removing nasal tumours, is mouthed like the half of the kernel 'found in the inside of a Jujube-stpne, with a little dip in the middle, its lip or end having a keen or sharp edge. The ends of the type of probe used in applying Anjanams medicated collyria to the eyelids are wrought into two small round lobes like the Matara pulse and are blunted, while the sort of probe used in cleansing the urethra, is made round like the end of tht; stem of a Mdlati flower. The Upa-yantras or minor surgical accessories — include such substances as rope, the Venika (braided hair;, silk thread, the bark and the inner-skin of trees, creepers, linen, Ashthila 'stones large , oval shaped pebbles, a hammer, the palms of the hands, the soles of feet, fingers^ tongue, the teeth, the nails, hair, the mane of horses, branches of trees, a magnet, alkali, fire, and medicine, and such acts as spitting, straining (kunthanam;, exhilaration and intimidation. IVIetrical texts —These accessories should be : applied to the entire body of a patient, or to any part thereof such as, the arteries, the ^'iscera, or the joints, according to the necessities of each case to be determined by the surgeon. The Functions of Surgical Instru- ments — are striking out Nirghatanam-lit — with- : : drawing a Shalyam by moving it to and fro), mjection or filling, binding, up-lifting, cutting and thereby withdrawing a Shalyam, resetting by means of a twirling motion, removing of a Shalyam from one place to another, twisting, expanding, pressing, purifying of a passage, drawing off, attracting, bringing to the surface, uplifting, lowering down, applying pressure all round a part, or an organ, agitating, sucking, searching, cutting or cleaving, straightening, washing or flushing, stuffing the nose and cleansing. They number twenty-four in all. IVIctrical texts :— The intelligent surgeon shall exercise his judgment and determine the nature of the surgical operation required in each individual case, for surely the shalj^as requiring a surgeon's aid are infinitely varied in their character. An appliance A^antraUvhich is too thick, or. made of inferior metal and hence) not substantially made, or too short or too long, or does not admit of being easily handled and is incapable of taking in the entire Shalyam, or is curved, loosely fitted, or soft-bolted, or loosely tied up with cords, 'should not be used in surgical operations). These are the twelve defects of a surgical instrument. Metrical texts : — The use of an instrument devoid of the abovesaid defects and measuring eighteen fingers in length, is commended in surgical operations, Shalyas which are manifest and visible to the naked eye, should be extracted with the instruments of the Chap. VII. ] SUTRASTHA'NAM, 6^ Sinha-mukha (lion-mouthed) type, while those that can not be seen, should be removed with the help of the Kanka-mukhas ( heron-mouthed ) instruments, etc., according to the directions laid down in the Shastras medical or surgical works of recognised authority). The Kanka-mukhas are the best of all other types of instruments, inasmuch as the}'- can be inserted and taken out without the least difficulty, are capable of drawing out a'Shalyam with the greatest ease, and are applicable to all parts of the human body 'be they an artery or a bone- joint.) Thus end.s the sevenih chapter "( ihc SiUiasthSnam of the Sushruta SamhitS which treats of the shape, construction and dimensions of surgical appliances. C H A PT E R V I I I. Now we shall discuss the Chapter which treats of instruments used in connection with a surgical operation. (Shastrarvacharaniyamaclhya^am). These instruments are twenty in number such as, the Mandalagram, the Karapatram, the Vriddhipatram, the Nakhashastram, the Mudrik^, the Utpalapatram, the Arddhadh^ram, the Suchi, the Kushapatram, the Atemukham, the Shardrimukham, the Antarmukhanij the Trikurchakam, the Kuth^rika, the Vrihimukham, the Ar^i, the Vetasapatrakam, the Vadisha,the Dantashanku, and the Eshani.* The MandaMgram measures six fingers in length and is provided with a round or circular face. The Karapatram is the same as the modern saw. The term Vriddhipatram signifies a razor. A Vriddhi- patram measures seven fingers in length, the handle alone measuring five fingers. The Nakhasastram is the same as the modern nail-clipper, the blade of the instrument measuring a finger in breadth. The Utpala- patram resembles a lotus leaf in shape. The Arddhadhfiram (lancet) measures eight fingers' breadth' in length, being one finger broad at the middle, and two fingers at the blade. The Suchi. is the same as the modern needle. The Kushapatram is so called from its resemblance to the blade of a Kusha-grass. An Atemukham resembles the bill of a bird of the Ate species. The blade of an Atemukham measures two fingers in length, the handle measuring five fingers and thus giving an entire length of seven fingers. The SharSrimukham (scissors) is so-called from the resemblance of its blades to the bills of a Shariri bird and looks somewhat like a modern black-smith's clipper, the measure of its entire length being twelve fingers. The Antarmukham is semicircular in shape and is provid- ed with a toothed edge like that of a hand-saw. The Trikurchakam (trocar) is provided with three separate blades. The intervening space between the couple of blades attached to a handle measuring five fingers in length, is equal to ihe width of a Vrihiseed, its entire length being eight fingeis. Of the abovesaid instruments the Mandalagram and the Karapatram should be 'used in incising and scraping. The Vriddhipatram, the Nakhasastram, the Mudrik^, the Utpalapatram, and the Arddhadharam, should be employed in incising f Chhedanam ) and excising (Bhedanani) ; and the Kushapatram, the Shuchi, the Atemukham, the Shararimukham, the Trikurchakam and the Antarmukham should be made use of in exudating or secreting (Visravanam.i The Kutharika, the Vrihimu- kham, the Ara, the Vetasapatram and the Suchi (needle) should be used in puncturing. The Vadisha and the Danta-Shanku should be used in extracting sohd bodies. The Eshani 1 probe or director) in probing or search- ing the course or direction of the pus (in a suppurated part), and the Suchi (needle; should be used in suturing. Thus we have explained the eight different func- tions ol the instruments in connection with surgical operations. The kutharika (small, blunt axe) measures seven lingers and a half in liic handle, the blade is half a finger in width and is blunted like the tooth of'a cow. The Vrihimukham measures six fingers in its entire length and its top is like that of a Vrihi seed, and the edge is cut into small thorn- like projections. The Ar5 resembles the awl of a cobbler and measures ten fingers in its entire length, the blade is wide as the seed of a sesamum and has the girth of a Durva (grass) stem. The Vetasapatram (knife) resembles the leaf of a Vetasa plant. The blade is four fingers in length, one finger in width, and is keenly edged, the handle measur- ing four fingers in length. The Vadisha is shaped like a modern fishing hook. The Danta-shanku (pincers for extracting teeth) somewhat resembles the Vrihimukham in shape. The face of an Eshani (probe) is like that of a Gandupada (earth-worm). 9
