[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 8]]
66 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. Ylll. No^v we shall deal with the mode ol handling the abovesaid instruments. — The Vriddhipatram and other instruments for excising (Bhedanam; should be caught hold of at a part between the blade and the handle. In acts of scraping the Vriddhipatram and the MandaUgram should be handled with the palm of the hand slightly turned up. The instruments for secreting should be caught hold of at the roots of their blades at the time of using them, while in the case of a king, an old man, a timid or a delicate person, a child, a woman and specially in the case of a prince of the royal blood, the Trikurchakam should be used when any secreting or exudating opera- tion would be necessary. The handle of a Vrihi- mukham should be kept concealed within the palm of the hand and the blade should be caught hold of with the thumb and the index finger (Pradeshini). The Kuth^rika should be first supported on the left hand and then struck with the thumb and third finger of the right. The Ara, the Karapatram and the Eshani, should be caught hold of at their roots. The rest of the surgical instruments should be grappled according to requirements. The abovesaid instruments are shaped like things which their very names imply, as ha^^e been al- ready described. The Nakashastram and the Eshani measure eight fingers in length. The Suchi (needle) Chap. VIII. ] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 67 shall be described later un. The top-ends of the Vadisha and the Danta-Shankhu pental pincers'; are a little bent down and their faces are made to resemble sharp thorns, or the newly sprouted leaves of a barley plant. The top-end of an Eshani closely resembles the mouth of an earth-worm. Tlie lenj^th of a Mudrika should be made equal to that of the top phalanges of the index finger 'of a man of avera'ge height.) A Shararimukham measures ten fingers in length. The rest of the instruments are mostly made to measure six fingers in length. Commendable features in a Surgi- cal instrument : —Instruments that are fitted with handles of easy grip and are made of good and pure iron, well shaped, sharp, and are set with edges that are not jagged and end in well formed points or tops, should be deemed as the best of their kind. Curvature, bluntness ( Kuntha— lit :— incapable of cutting hair , unequal sharpness of the edge, rough- edgedness, over- thickness, over-thinness, over-lengthi- ness, and over-shortness are the defective traits in a surgical instrument. Those possessed of contrary features should be used. But a Karapatram set with a very rough (dentated) edge may be used for the purpose of sawing the bones. A surgical instrument meant *'or excision 'Bhedanann should be set with an edge as thin as that of a Musura 68 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. VIII. pulse 'lentil seed , while an instrument used in scraping should be set with an edge half as thin as that of the former. An instrument used either in connection with the measures of secretion or cutting by uplifting (Vyadhanam) should be set with an edge as fine as the human hair, while an instrument of incision should have an edge half as thin as that of the former. Surgical instruments should be tempered with one of the three substances such as, alkali, water, and oil. Instruments used in cutting an arrow, a bone, or any foreign matter (Shalyami pricked into the human body, should be tempered with alkali, whereas those that are made use of in cutting, cleaving, and lopping off the flesh from an affected part), should be tempered with water. Instruments used in opening Vyadhanam) a vein (Shira) or in cutting open a nerve .Sna)^!: should be tempered with oil, and should be whetted upon a species of stone-slab resembling a Masha pulse in colour, and their set- edge should be protected by putting it in a sheath made of Sh^lmali wood. Authoritative verses on the sub- ject :— An instrument, well-ground, well-shaped, fitted with a convenient handle and capable of (laterally) cutting a hair in two and made according to measures laid down in the Shastras, should be alone used in a surgical operation. Chap. VIII. ] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 6g The Inferior or substitutive instru- ments (the Anu-Shastras — The skin of bamboos, : crystals, bits of glass, Kuruvindas Ca sort of crystal"* leeches, fire, alkali, nails, the leaves of trees known as Goji, Shephalika and Shakapatra, the tender sprouts of corn, hair, and the fingers, should be included within the category of the minor instruments of surgery and (which may be used in certain instances in substitution for the principal and usual ones. Metrical texts :— The four articles such as strips of bamboo skin, crystals, bits of glass, and the rock known as Kuruvinda, should be used by an intelli- gent physician in incising or excising Bhedanam i opera- tions, where the patient would be found to have a dread of the knife, or too young to be surgically operated upon with it, or where the proper instrument cannot be pro- cured. The nails of fingers should be used in operations of incising, excising or extracting in (substitution for the instruments enjoined to be used for the purpose), when such a course would appear feasible. The processes of applying alkalis, leeches and cauterisation will be dealt with later on. In Diseases affecting the eyelids or the cavity of the mouth, operations for the purposes of secreting or evacuating 'the accumulated pus or phlegm), may be performed with the leaves of Shakapatra, Shephalika or Gojis. In the absence of a probe or director, searching may be done with the help ^o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. L Chap. vili. of a finger, or with a hair, or with a corn sprout. An intelligent physician should deem it his im- perative duty to get his surgical instruments made by a skilful and experienced blacksmith, and of pure, strong and sharp iron steel >. A physician, skilled in the art of using surgical instruments, is always successful in his professional practice, and hence the practice of surgery should be commenced at the very outset of medical studies. Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Sutrasthiinam in the Sushruta SamhitS which treats of Surgical|Instruments.
