[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 1]]
^ • THE SUSHRUTA SAMHUA SUTRASTHANAM. Well, we* shall now describe the origin of the Science of Medicine, as disclosed by the holy Dhanvantari to his disciple Sushruta. (Vedotpattimadhyaryam). Once upon a time, when the holy Dhanvantari, the greatest of the mighty celestials, incarnated in the form of Divodasa, the king of Kasi, was blissfulh^ seated, in his hermitage, surrounded bv a concourse of holy Rishis ; Aupadhenava, Vaitarana, Aurabhra, Paush- kalavata, Karavirya, Gopura-rakshita, Sushruta and others addressed him as follows — "O Sire, : it grieves us much to find men, though otherwise well befriended " The present work which originally formed the subject of a discourse by the holy sage Dhanvantari to his disciple Sushruta, has been compiled in its present form by the venerable Nagarj una, and is accordingly designated as the Sushruta Samhila. b)' the'ir kin and relations, falling a prey to diseases, mental, physical, traumatic, or natural, and piteously wailing in agony like utterly friendless creatures on earth ; and we supplicate thee, O Lord, to illumine our minds with the truths of the Eternal Ayurveda (Medical Science) so that we may faithfully discharge the duties allotted to us in life, and alleviate the sufferings of humanit)" at large. Bliss in this life and hereafter, is in the gift of this eternal Ayurveda, and for this, O Lord, we have made bold to approach thee as thy humble disciples." To them, thus replied the hoi}' Dhanvantari — "Welcome to : all of you to this blissful hermitage. All of you are worthy of the honour of true pupilship or tutelage." The A'yui'veda (which forms the subject of our present discourse), originally formed one of the sub- sections of the Athar\'a A'eda ; and even before the creation of mankind, the self-begotten Brahma strung it together into a hundred thousand couplets (Shlokas), divided into a thousand chapters. But then he thought of the small duration of human life on earth, and the failing character of human memory, and found it prudent to divide the whole of the Ayurveda into eight different branches such as, the Salya- Tantram, the Salakya-Tantram, the Kaya-Chikitsa, the Bhuta-Vidy.i, the KauniHr-Bhrityci, the Agada-Tantram, the Rusa\"ana-Tantram and the \'ajeekarana-Tantram. Chap. I. ] SUTRASTHAN'AM. ^ Xow about the characteristi'c features of each of these branches of the Science of the Ayurveda : The Salya-Tantram*— The scope of this branch of Medical Science is to remote from an ulcer) any extraneous substanx:e such as, iTagments of hay, particles of stone, dust, iron or bone ; splinters, nails, hair, clotted blood, or condensed pus (as the case may be , or to draw out of the uterus a dead foetus, or to bring about safe parturitions in cases of false presentation, and to deal with the principle and mode of using and handling surgical instruments in general, and with the application of fire (cautery) and alkaline (caustic) substances, together with the diagno- sis and treatment of ulcers. The Sha'Ia'kya-Tantramt— embraces as its object the treatment of those diseases which are restricted to the upward (lit: —region above the clavicles) fissures or cavities of the body, such as the ears, the eyes, the cavity of the mouth, the nostrils, etc. The Ka'ya-Chikitsar (General diseases! treats of diseases, which, instead of being simply * Any foreign mailer, lodged in a human organism and proving painful 10 it, is called a Shalya. t The name is derived from the Sanskrit term Slialak^, a probe or a rod, the use and application of the instrument being primarily jincluded within the scope of this branch of the Ayurveda. J The term K^ya literally signifies the vital heat or fire which runs through the entire system, and hence the II5ya-chikits6 deals with diseases which may gradually invade the root-principles of a living human organism. 4 THE SUSHRUTA SAATHITA' [ Cliap. I. restricted to an}^ specific organ, or to any particular part of the body, affect the entire system, as Fever, Dysentery, Haemoptysis, Insanity, Hysteria, Leprosy, unnatural discharges from the urethra, etc. The Bhuta-Vidya' 'Demoniacal diseases) lays down incantations and modes of exorcising evil spirits and making offerings to the gods, demons, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshas, etc. for cures of diseases originating from their malignant influences. The Kauma'ra-Bhritya Management of children) — deals with the nursing and healthy bringing up of infants, with purification and bettering of mothers' milk, found deficient in any of its characteristic traits, and also with cures for diseases peculiar to infant life and due to the use of vitiated mother's milk or to the influences of malignant stars and spirits. The Agada-Tantram Toxicology— deals with bites from snakes, spiders and venomous worms, and their characteristic symptoms and antidotes. It hai also for its object the elimination of poison whether animal, vegetable, or chemical (resulting from incompatible combinations) from the system of a man, overwhelmed with its effects. The Rasa'yana-Tantram Science of Rejuvenation , —has for its specific object the Chap. I. ] SUa^RASTHA'NAM. 5 prolongation of human life, and tl^e invigoration of memory and the vital organs of man. It deals with recipes which enable a man to retain his manhood or youthful vigour up to a good old age, and which generally serve to make the human system invuhierable to disease and deca}'. The Varjcckarana-Tantram (Science of Aplarodisiacs, —treats of measures b}' which the semen of a man naturally scanty or deficient in quality becomes shorn of its defects ; or is purified, if deranged by the ^•itiated humours of the body (such as wind, etc. ; or is invigorated and increased in quantit}' (if pure and healthy) ; or acquires its health}' and normal consistence ' if thinned and enfeebled by indiscretions of youth\ [In short, it deals with things which increase the pleasures of youth and make a man doubly endearing to a woman]. Thus the entire science of the Ayurveda is classified into the eight preceding branches. Xow tell me, which of them is to be taught and to which of you ? Said the disciples : — "Instruct us all, O Lord, in the science of surgery ( Shalya ) and let that be the chief subject of our study." To which replied the holy Dhan- vantari — "Be : it so." Then the disciples again said — "We are : all of one mind in the matter, O Lord, that Sushruta shall be our spokesman aiid .ask you questions conformably to the general trend of our purpose. All of us will attentively hear what you will be pleased to discourse to Sushruta, [and that will save you the trouble of teaching us individuall)']". To which replied the venerable sage — ",Be it so. Now listen, Sushruta, m}- dear child. The object or utility of the science which forms the subject of our present discus- sion, ma}' be gi^ouped under two distinct sub-heads such as (i) the cure of diseased persons, and (2) the presetva- tion of health in those who are not afflicted with any sort of bodily distempers." The etymological meaning of the term "Ayur- veda" may be interpreted to denote either a science in the knowledge of which life exists, or which helps a man to enjoy a longer duration of life. The primary position of surgery:— [As regards time and importance among the other allied branches of the Science of Medicine]. Hear me discourse on the Science of Surgery { Shalya-Tantram) which is the oldest of all the other branches of the Science of Medicme (Ayurveda) and is fuither corroborated by the four classes of testimonies, viz., Perception, Inference, Analogv and Scriptural Truths (Agamas). The primary position of this branch of the Ayurveda, (as regards its time or origin), may be inferred from the fact that Surgerv lends her aid materiallv towards the « healing up of traumatic mlcers.* The 'second reason for such an intWence may be deduced from the replacement of the severed head of Yajna. It is told that the god Rudra, severed the head of the God of Sacrifice (Yajna). Whereupon the gods approached the celestial Ashvins, and addressed them as follows — "You twins, O : lords, who are to be the greatest of us all, connect the head of \''aj?ia with his decapitated trunk." To them, replied the divine Ashvins — " We shall do, O : lords, as you command us to do." Then the celestials propitiated the god Indra in order that a portion of the oblations offered in the course of a sacrifice, might be allotted to those heavenly twins. The Ashvins reunited the severed head of Yajna to his body as prayed for. [Hence this branch of the Ayurveda (Shalyanga) is the oldest of all its subdivisions]. The primary importance of the Shalyam —All hold this Tantram to be the : most imnortant of all the other branches of the Mi^o See/' 'f ' "^^^ ^^ suc^w ^^ ^receptacle ofheauff iustantaueous actious can be ' ^^ ^^^^^^ appliances as, r/VPQ ^ 3 Jb|*/£^getable world belongs t ^ Ve|*Op , T o^ locomotion, belong to ^Jnav be areued here, since nd sword-cuts had to be dressed and ^ ^^^ to iuindamental material the gods and the denwns, long before tllQ ff dQ^f]^ 'ippearance Oir) ], it is not ct' idiopathic maladies such-^ as, fever, etc. ; ad Smgery contruvofold attril/ was demanded of her towards the healint; "-• up of those u'cers. li>. But s' branch of the Ayurveda is the oldest of all IP the allied brawhes of thu-se in.ng art. surgical operatioi|s, external applications of alkalis, cauterisation, etc., and -.secondly inasmuch as it contains all that can be found in the other branches of the science of medicine as well, with the superior advantage of producing instantaneous effects by means of surgical instruments and appliances. Hence it is the highest in value of all the medical Tantras. It is eternal and a source of infinite piety, imparts fame and opens the gates of Heaven to its votavies, prolongs the duration of human existence on earth, and helps men in successfully fulfilling their missions, and earning a decent competence, in life. Gradual extension of the Ayur- vedic Knowledge :—Bramha was the first to inculcate the principles of the holy Ayurveda. Prajapati learned the science from him. The Ashvins learned it from Prajapati and imparted the knowledge to Indra, who has favoured me ( Dhanvantari ) with an entire knowledge thereof. I, for the good of mankind, am ready to impart it to those ^;-}-i^antram)-M^i^ earth. anches of the Sci The King of Kar?^,ther corroborate'^^ ac- count Of himself i._^ pe,ception, Inft'^^ '^^ supreme and original god i^^^^j^^ *^"^^ ^^ (Agam?' Dhanvantifri. It is I who warde , disease and f tl decay fi-on\ the celestials, ^o - Kg j,-,^ was an inmate of the region of heaven, now I a . ^ .carnated on earth Chap. I.] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 9 with the view to teach the Science of SurgeiV with all its allied branches of study to men. In the present science (Ayurveda), the Piirusha (self- conscious oro:anic individual) is described as the resultant of the combination of the soul and the five primar>- material principles. All medical acts such as, surgical operations, administration of medicinal remedies and applications of alkaline substances, or cauterisation, etc.), are restricted to the Piirusha alone.* Why is it so ? The answer is, simply because the created world is composed of two distinct classes, such as the mobile and the immobile. f These two classes, in their turn, are further sub-divided for the purposes of the science of medicine into the two orders, Agneya hot and Saumya (cool. Hence the world is composed of fi^'e material principles, though characterised by the twofold virtues, Agneya (hot) and Saumya (cool).i * It may be questioned why they should be confined to the Puiusha ? Such a query may be successfully met by the statement that the Purusha alone is the receptacle of health and disease in contradistinction to the Self or Ego. t The vegetable world belongs to the latter category, while 'animals, possessed of locomotion, belong to the former. X It may be argued here, since everything in the universe is composed of the five fundamental material principles [ of earth, water, fire (heat), air and sky (ether) ], it is not competent to assert that the universe is possessed of the twofold attributes Agneya (heated or fiery) and Saumya (cool or watery), alone. But since fire (heat) or water (cold) predominates in all things in the universe in juxtaposition with ihe primary virtues of the 10 THE SUSWRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. I. Further cliassification of the mobile and the immobile :- The animated world may be divided into four subdivisions, such as the Svedaja (born of sweat or heat and moisture ?'. e. abiogenous' the Andaja ( egg-born or oviparous ), the Udbhijja (vegetable) and the Jarayuja (placental or viviparous j. The Purusha or the subjective personalit}' (man) is the greatest of them all, because all other forms of life are made to minister to his wants on Earth. Disease : Sts Definition :— The Purusha (man) is the receptacle of any particular disease, and that which proves a source of torment or pain to him, is deno- minated as a disease.* There are four different types of disease such as, Traumatic or of extraneous origin (Agantuka), Bodily (Sharira), jNfenla] (Manasa) and Natural (Svabhavika). A disease clue to an extraneous blow or hurt is called Agantuka. Diseases due to irregularities in food or drink, or incidental to a deranged state of the blood, or of the bodily humours acting either singh' or in concert, are called Sharira. Excessive anger, grief, fear, joy, despondency, envy, miser};, ])ride, greed, lust, desire, malice, etc. are other fundamental material principles, it is not improper to classify all under the head of hot or cold, a third factor being non-existent. Hence the world (^Trf) is possessed of the twofold virtues, hot and cold. * A disease may be defined as something whicli affiicts the Purusha (self-conscious personality), or those things or incidents which combine to afflict the Purusha are usually interpreted to connote that meaning. included within the category of^ mental (Manasa) distempers ; whereas hm7.ger, thirst, decrepitude, imbecility, death, sleep, etc. are called the natural (Svabhavika) derangements of the body. The Mind and the Bodv are the seats of the abovesaid distempers according as they are restricted to either of them, or * affect both of them in unison. Samshodhanam (Cleansing), and Samshamanam (Pacification of the deranged or agitated bodih' humours giving rise to the disease^ and the regimen of diet and conduct are the four fectors which should be duly emplo3"ed in order to successfully cope with a disease.! Food is the principal factor which materially contri- butes to the strength, complexion and vitality (Ojah) of animated beings. Food consists of six different tastes * The Self or Ihe feevitma of a person is above all human concerns and, as such, can never be affected by any disease. t Cleansing (Samshodhanam) is of two kinds, viz. External and Internal. External purification consists in employing such measures as surgical operations, cauterisation of the affected part or organ, external use of alkaline preparations and medicated plasters, the internal one including such measures as exhibition of purgatives and emetics, application of intestinal enemas (Asthapanam) and blood-letting. Diet comprises four different factors such as, food, drink, lambative, etc., which, for the purposes of the Ayurveda, are again grouped under three different heads, such as the pacifier of the deranged bodily humours (Dosha-prashamanam), thera- peutical (VyMhi-prashamanam) and health-giving (Svastha=Vrittikara). Achara (conduct) appertains to three different factors, such as the body, the speech, and the mental acts. The abovesaid measures, duly employed, arc potent enough to combat all sorts of bodily distempers, if the special exigencies of each case arc carefully taken into consideration. (Rasa) '[which capnot exist independently of the subs- tances] in which they are inherent. These substances which are called the (3shadhis may be di^ided into two classes such as the mobile and the immobile. The immobile Oshadhis in their turn, admit of being grouped under four sub-heads such as, the ^'"anaspatis, the Vrikshas. the Virudhas and the Oshadhis proper. Those trees which bear fruit without blossoming are called the Vanaspatis such as, the Plaksha and the Oudumvura). Those that bear both fruits and flowers are called the \'rikshas. Shrubs and creepers that trail on the ground are called Virudhas, whereas those plants which die with the ripening of their fruits, are called Oshadhis proper such as cereals . The mobile Oshadhis or animals are divided into four classes such as the viviparous, the oviparous, the sweat-begotten, and those that are born of decomposed vegetable matter. Man and other mammals belong to the first group ; birds, snakes, and reptiles belong to the second ; ants, worms, etc. belong to the third ; while frogs and Indragopas belong to the fourth. For medicinal pur- poses, bark, leaves, flowers, fruits, roots, bulbs, the ex- pressed juice, and milky or resinous secretions of plants, etc.* are .obtained from the vegetable world. The * The use of oil expressed oui of diutjs and seeds, as well as of iheir ashes or alkaline preparations are likewise indicated. Chap. I.] SUTRASTHAWAM. I-^ skin, nails, wool, blood, flesh, fat., marrow, bones, are procured from the animal world. JMetals and minerals such as gold, silver, gems, and Manahshila i Realgar), as well as pearls, clay and Kapalas (bones^, etc. should be included in the list of * the earthy substances. Gale, windfall, sunshine, shade, moonshine, dark- ness, heat, cold, rain, day, night, fortnight, month, » seasons, and solstices, etc. should be deemed as the works of eternal time, which, by virtue of their natural effects, contribute to the accumulation, augmentation, pacification or diminution of the deranged bodilv humours (such as, wind, etc. . Authoritative verses on the sub- ject : — Physicians should look upon these four factors of ffood, conduct, earth and time , as the accumulators, aggravators and pacifiers of the deranged bodilv humours and of the diseases resulting therefrom in man. Diseases due to causes which are extraneous to the bodv ma\' affect the mind or the body. When it would affect the body in the shape of any traumatic disease (such as an inflammation due to a blow or a sword cut >, it "should be treated medicinally like the rest of the physical mala- dies, while the remedy should consist in the enjovmentof * Oxide of Iron, sand, yellow sulphurale of arsenic (Orpiment), sail, Gairika (ferruginous earth), Rasdnjana (antimony) should be regarded as appertaining to the class of earthy substances. 14 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. hap. I. pleasurable sound?, touch, sights, taste or smell where the mind would be found to be the seat of the distemper. Thus I have briefly dealt with the Purusha, Disease, Medicine, Appliances and the Specific Time. The term Purusha should be interpreted to include within its meaning the combination of its five material com- ponents, and all things resulting therefrom, such as the limbs and members of the body, as well as the skin, the flesh, the blood, the veins and the nerves, etc. The term Disease signifies all distempers incidental to the several or combined actions of the three deranged bodily humours and blood. The term Medicine signifies drugs and their virtues, tastes, potency, inherent efficacy Prabhava and reactionary properties Vipaka . Appliances (kriya denotes such processes as, surgical operations, injections, emulsive measures, lubrications, etc. The term Time signifies all opportune moments for medical appliances. Authoritative verses on the sub- ject —The primary principle of the Science of medicine : has thus been briefly stated and will be fully dealt with in the'following one hundred and twenty chapters distri- buted among the fi-\e main sub-divisions or Sthanas of the present work. These hundred and twenty chapters will be found to be elaborately discussed according to the specific import or significance of their denominations under the sub-heads of Sutra- Sthanam (Definitive Aphorisms or Fundamental principles, Nidanam ^Etiology", Sharira-Sthanam (Anatomy and Physiology , Chikitsa-Sthanam (Therapeutics) and Kalpa-Sthanam (Toxicology . Subjects other than the preceding ones will be discussed in the closing chapters of the book by wa}- of an Appendix (Uttara-Tantranv. Authoritative verse on the sub- ject : — The man who reads this Eternal Science of Medicine ( Ayurveda-Shastram ) discoursed by the self- origined Brahma and propagated by the King of Kasi, becomes noted for his piety, is honoured by the kings on earth, and attains to the region of Indra (the lord of the celestials) after death. Thus ends the first chapter of the Sutra-SthSnam in the Sushrula Samhitd which deals with the origin of the Ayurveda.
