[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 38]]
Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals with the general classification of drugs according to their therapeutical(Dravya-Sangra- properties haniya-madhyaryam). These drugs are usually made into thirty-seven different groups (Gana) which are as follows : The Vidarigandha'cli Croup:— The drugs known as Vidarigandha, Vidari, Sahadeva, Vishvadeva, Shvadanstra, Prithakparni, Shatavari, Sariva, black Sariva, Jivaka, Rishavaka, Mahasaha, Kshudra-Saha, Vrihati, Kantakari, Punarnava, Eranda, Hansapadi, Vrishchikah, and Rishavi, form the group known as the Vidari-gandhadi. IVIetrical Text : —The present gi-oup of drugs subdues the action of the deranged Vayu and Pittam and proves beneficial in phthisis ;Shosha~^, Gulma, aching of the limbs, Urdha Shvasa and cough. The A'ragvadha'di Group :— The drugs known as Aragvadha, Madana, Gopaghonta, Kutaja, Patha, Kantaki^ Patala, Murva, Indrayava, Saptaparna, Ximva, Kuruntaka, Dasi-kuruntaka, the two kinds of Karanja, Patola, Kiratttikua, Guduchi, Chitraka, Sh^ngshta, and Susha^•i form the group known as the Aragvadhjidi. Metrical Text — The : group under discus- sion destroys the deranged Kaphani and the effects of poison and proves beneficial in cases of Meha (^morbid discharges from the urethra), Kushtha, fever, vomiting and itching of the body and acts as a purifying (aseptic) agent in the case of an ulcer. The Varuna'di Group : —The drugs known as Varuna, Artagala, Shigru, Madhu-Shigi-u, Tarkari, Mesha-Shringi, Putika, Xaktamala, Morata, Agni- mantha, the two kinds of Sairiyaka, Vimvi, Vasuka, Vasira, Chitraka, Shatavari, Mlva, Ajashringi, Darbha, and the two kinds of Vrihati form the group known as the Varunadi. IVIetrical Text : —The group is possessed of the efficacy of reducing the deranged Kapham and fat and proves efficacious in cases of cephalaegia, Gulma and internal abscesses. The Viratarva'di Group :— The drugs known as Virataru, the two kinds of Sahachara, Darbha, Vrikshadani, Gundra, I\'ala, Kusha, Kasha, Ashma- bhedaka, Agnimantha, Morata Vasuka, Vasira, Bhalluka, Kuruntaka, Indivara, Kapotavanka, and Sh^adanstra enter into the composition of the group known as the Viratarvadi. IVIetrical Text :— The group subdues all dis- orders incidental to the deranged state of Vata and 344 1*ilE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. t Chap, xxxvili. proves curative in Ashmari, Sharkara, Mutra- krichhra, Mutraghata and urinary troubles. The Sa^Iasara'di Group :— The group of medicinal drugs, known as the Salasaradi, consists of Salasara, Ajakarna, Khadira, Kadara, Kalaskandha, Kramuka, Bhurjja, Meshashringi, Tinisha, Chandana, Kuchandana, Shinshapa, Shirisha, Asana, Dhava, Arjuna, Tala, Shaka, Xaktamala, Putika Ashvakarna, Aguru and Kaliyaka. IVIctrical Texts ; -The group of the drugs, known as the Salasaradi Gana, destroys the germ of Kushtha, absorbs the deranged fat and Kapham and proves beneficial in morbid discharges from the urethra (Meha\ chlorosis or jaundice (Pandu). The Rodhrardi Group:—The group of medi- cinal drugs known as the Rodhradi consists of Rodhra, Savararodhra, Palasha Kutannata, Ashoka, Phanji, Katphala, Elabaluka, Sallaki, Jingini, Kadamva, Sala and Kadali. IVIetrical Texts :— The group is antidotal to the deranged Kapham and fat, is astringent in its properties, removes vaginal and uterine disorders, neutralises the effects of poison (anti toxic) and acts as a stj'ptic and purifying agent in a case of ulcer and arrests all secretions and excretions of the body. The Arkardi Group :--The drugs known as the Arka, Alarka, the two kinds of Karanja, Nagadanti, Mayuraka, Bhargi, Rasna, Indrapiishpi, Kshudrashveta Mahashveta, Vrishchikali, Alavana and Tapasha-Vriksha, enter into the composition of the group known as the Arkadi Gana. Metrical Texts:— The group known as the Arkadi destroys Kaphani, fat, and the effects of poison. It acts as a vermifuge and a specific aseptic agent in the case of an ulcer and proves curative in diseases of the skin. The Surasa'di Group :—The drugs known as Surasa, white Surasa, Fainjjhaka, Arjaka, Bhustrina, Sugandhaka, Sumukha, Kalamala, Kashamarda, Kshavaka, Kharpushpa, Vidanga, Katphala_, Surasi, Nirgundi, Kulahala, Indurakarnika, Phanji, Prachi- vala, Kakamachi and Vishamushtika form the group known as the Surasadi Gana. IVIetrical Texts :—The group acts as a vermifuge and is an aseptic agent. It subdues the deranged Kapham and proves beneficial in catarrh, non-relish for food, asthma and cough. The lYIushkaka'di Group:—The group of medicinal drugs known as the Mushkakadi consists of Mushkaka, Palasha, Dhava, Chitraka, Madana, Shinshapa, Vajra-Vriksha and Triphala. Metrical Text :— The present group is possessed of the therapeutic virtue o-f destroying fat and 346 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XXXVIII. removing the defects of semen. Meha, piles, jaundice, chlorosis, gravels and urinary calculi in the bladder are the diseases which yield Lo its curative efficac)'. The Pippalya'di Group: -The group of medicinal drugs known as the Pippalyadi consists of Pippali, Pippali mulam, Chavya, Chitraka, Shringavera, Maricha, Hasti-Pippali, Harenuka, Ela, Ajamoda, Indrayava, Patha, Jiraka, Sarshapa, Maha-Nimva-Phala, Hingu, Bhargi, Madhurasa, Ativisha, Vacha, Vidanga and Katurohini. IVIetrical Text —The present group acts as a : good appetiser and is an absorbant of intestinal mucous and unassimilated lymph chyle. The range of its thera- peutical application includes catarrh, deranged Kapham and Vatam, non-relish for food, abdominal glands, colic and gastralgia. The Elardi Group —The group of medicinal : drugs known as the Eladi-Gana consists of Ela, Tagara, Kushtha, M^nsi, Dhyamaka, Tvaka, Patra, Naga- pushpa, Priyangu, Harenuka, Vyaghranakha, Shukti, Clianda, Sthauneyaka, Shriveshtaka, Chocha, Choraka, Valaka, Guggulu, Sarjarasa, Turushka, Kunduruka, Aguru, Sprikka, Ushira, Bhadradaru, Kumkuma, Punnaga and Keshara. IVIetrical Text :— The therapeutic virtue of the group consists in subduing the action of V^yu and Kapham and in neutralising the effects of poison. It is a cosmetic and arrests* the eruption of pimples and other vegetations on the skin such as rash, urticaria etc. and checks the itching sensation incidental thereto. The Vach2rcli and Haridrardi Groups :- The groups known as the Vachadi and Haridradi Ganas, respectively consist of Vacha, Musta, Ativisha, Abhaya, Bhadradaru, Nagakeshara (Vachadi), Haridra, Daruharidr^, Kalashi, Kutaja seeds and Madhuka (Haridradi). IVIetrical Text: —These two groups are the purifiers of breast milk and specifically act as the assimilators of the deranged humours of the body, their curative properties being markedly witnessed in cases of mucous dysentery (Amatisiira). The Shy^mardi Group : -The drugs known as Shyama, Mahd-Shyam^, Trivrit, Danti, Shan- khini, Tilvaka, Kampillaka, Ramyaka, Kramuka, Putrashroni, Gavakshi, Rajavriksha, the two kinds of Karanja, Guduchi, Saptala, Chhagalantri, Sudh^ and Suvarnakhiri, form the group known as the Shyam^di Gana. Metrical Text — This group is possessed : of the therapeutic virtue of curing abdominal glands and acts as an anti-toxic. It proves beneficial in An^ha 'epistasis), abdominal dropsy and diarrhoea and is one of the most reliable purgatives in cases of obstinate constipation of the bowels with suppression of urine and distention of the abdomen (Udavarta). The Vrihatya'di Group :-^The drugs known as Vrihati, Kantakarika, Kutajaphala, Patha and Madhuka combinedly form the group known as the Vrihatyadi Gana. IVIctrical Text :— The group is a good digestant or assimilator of the deranged humours. It subdues the deranged Vata, Pitta and Kapham and proves efficacious in cases of nausea, water-brash, d^'suria and non- relish for food. The Patola'di Group:— The drugs known as Patola, Chandana, Kuchandana, Murva, Guduchi, Patha, and Katurohini form the group known as the Patoladi Gana. IVIetrical Text —The group is a febrifuge and : anti-toxic, and its therapeutic action consists in destroy- ing the action of the deranged Pittam and Kapham. It restores the natural relish of the patient for food, removes vomiting, and proves beneficial in ulcers, and itching erythematous eruptions. The Ka'kolya'di Group :—The drugs known as Kakoli-Kshira-Kakoli, Jivaka, Rishabhaka, Mudga- parni, Mashaparni, Meda, Mah^meda, Chhinna-ruha, Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 349 Karkata-Shringi, Tugakshiri, Padmaka, Prapaundarika, Riddhi, Vriddhi, Mridvika, Jivanti and Madhuka, com- binedly form the group known as the Kakolyadi Gana. IVIetrical Text :— The group of medicinal drugs under discussion subdues the action of the deranged Pittam, blood and Vayu. It increases the quantity of milk in the breast f galactagogue) and favours the accumulation of phlegm (Kapham) in the body. It is a restorative and an elixir and is endued with the therapeutic virtue of augmenting the virile potency of a man. The Ushaka'di Group :—The medicinal drugs and substances known as Ushaka (alkaline earth) Saindhava salt, Shilajatu, the two kinds of Kasisa, Hingu and Tutthaka enter into the composition of the group known as the Ushakadi Gana. IVIetrical Text — It destroys kapham mucous), : absorbs the fat of the body and proves curative in cases .of stone or gravel in the bladder (urinary calculi), dysuria and abdominal glands fGulma\ The Sa'riva'di Group :— The drugs known as Sariva, Madhuka, Chandana, Kuchandana, Padmaka, Kashmari phala, Madhuka-pushpa and Ushira_, com- binedly form the group known as the Sarivadi Gana. IVIetrical Text :—The group under discussion allays thirst and proves curative in a case of haemoptysis. 350 'i'HE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap. XXXVIII. Its therapeutic virtue consists in curbing an attack of bilious (Pittaja) fever and in specifically alleviating the burning sensation (Daha) of the body. The Anjana'di Group :-The group known as the Anjanadi Gana consists of Anjana, Rasanjana, Nagapushpa, Priyangu, Nilotpala, Nalada, Nalina, Keshara and Madhuka. Metrical Texts :— An attack of hasmoptj-sis readily 5n'elds to the curative virtue of the group under discussion. It is anti-toxic in its character and allays the internal burning sensation of the body. The Parushaka'di Group:—The gioup known as the Parushakadi Gana consists of Parushaka, Dr^ksha, Kat-phala, Dadima, Rajadana, Kataka-phala Shaka-phala and Triphala. lYIetrical Text — It : subdues the deranged Vayu, allays thirst, acts as a cordial, increases one's relish for food 'and cures the diseased or abnormal com- ponents of urine or its defects. The Priyangvardi Group:— The group of medicinal drugs known as the Priyangvadi Gana consists of Priyangu, Samang^, Dhataki, Naga-pushpa, Chandana, Kuchandana, Mocharasa, Rasanjana, Kumbhika, Srotohnjana, Padma- keshara, Jojanvalli, and Dirghamula. The Amvashtha'di Group:— Drugs known as Amvashth^, Dhataki flowers, Samanga, Katvanga, Madhuka, Vilva-peshika, Rodhra, Savara-Rodhra, Palasha, Xandi-Vriksha and Padma keshara, enter into the composition of the group known as the Amvashthadi Gana. lYletrical Text:— The two medicinal recipes or groups prove beneficial in a case of deranged Pitta, favour the heahng of ulcers, bring about the adhesion of fractured bones and prove curative in cases of dysentery where the stools are found to consist of lumps of thick and matured mucous (Pakvatisara.) The Nya'grodha'di Croup:— The drugs known as Nyagrodha, Audumvara, Ashvattha, Plaksha, Madhuka, Kapitana, Kakubha, Amra, Koshamra, Chorakapatra, the two sorts of Jamvu, Piyala, Madhuka (Maula), Rohini, Vanjula, Kadamva, Vadari, Tinduki, Sallaki, Rodhra, Savara-Rodhra, Bhallataka, Palasha, and Nandi-Vriksha, combinedly form the group known as the Nyagodhradi Gana. Metrical Texts : — This group proves bene- ficial in cases of ulcer, cures all disorders of the uterus and vagina, favours the adhesion of fractured bones and all sorts of secretions of the body in addition to its astringent properties (Sangrahi) and proves curative in a case of haemoptysis. It is an anti-fat and assuages the burning sensation of the body. The Guduchya'di Group :—The drugs known as Guduchi, Ximva, Kustumvuru, Chandana, and Padmaka, combinedly form the group known as the Guduchyadi Gana. IVIctrical Text:— It is a good appetiser, and acts as a general febrifuge and successfully combats such symptoms as nausea, want of relish for food, vomiting, thirst and burning sensation of the body. The Utpala'di Group :— The drugs known as Utpala, Raktotpala, Kumuda Saugondhika, Kuvalaya, Pundarika and Madhuka constitute the group known as the Utpaladi Gana. lYIetrical Texts — This group is possessed of : the therapeutic virtue of allaying thirst and corrects the deranged Pittam and the vitiated blood. It assuages the burning sensation of the body and proves curative in cases of vomiting, in Hridroga (Angina pectoris'^ in syncope, in ha3mopt\sis and in cases of poisoning as well. The lYIusta'di Group :— The group of drugs known as Mushtadi Gana is composed of Musta, Haridra, Daru-Haridra, Haritaki, Amlaki, Vibhitaka, Kushtha, Haimavati, Vacha, Patha, Katu- rohini, Sharngashta, Ativisha, Dravidi, Bhallataka and Chitraka. Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHANAM. ^53 Metrical Text —The group under discussion : destroys the deranged Shleshma, cures uterine and vaginal disorders, purifies the breast milk of a mother, and acts as a good digestant (Pachana). The Triphalar Group :- The drugs known Haritaki, Amlaki and Vibhitaka, constitute the group known as the Triphaladi Gana. Metrical Text :— The present group destroys the action of the deranged Vayu, Kapham and Pittam and proves curative in Meha, and in diseases of the skin (Kushtham). It is a good appetiser, improves the eyesight and proves beneficial in chronic intermittent fever (Vishama-jvara). The Trikatu Group :—The Trikatu group consists of Pippali, Maricha and Shringavera. Metrical Text :— It destroys fat and Kapham, proves curative in cutaneous affections, leprosy (Kushtha), and morbid discharges from the urethra, and is possessed of the virtue of curing abdominal glands, catarrh, dullness of the appetite and indigestion. The A'mlakya'di Group :— The group known as the Amlakyadi Gana consists of Amlaki, Haritaki, Pippali and Chitraka. Metrical Text —The present group of medici- : nal drugs acts as a general febrifuge and may be used ^54 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [ Chap, xxxviil. with advantage in fevers of whatsoever type. Moreover, it is an aphrodisiac and acts as a general tonic or resto- rative and appetiser, destroying the deranged Kapham and improving the eyesight. The Trapvardi Group :—Tlie group known as the Trapvadi Gana consists of Trapu, Sisa, Tamra, Rajata, Krishna-Lauha, Suvarna and Lohamala. lYIctrical Text :— The present group is regarded as a good vermifuge and possessed of the virtue of neutrahsing the effects of chemical poison originated through incompatible combinations. Its therapeutic range covers jaundice, chlorosis, Melia (morbid secre- tions from the uretlira), Hridroga (heart disease), thirst and maladies incidental to the effects of poison. The La'ksha'di Group :—The drugs known as the Laksha, Arevata, Kutaja, Ashvamara, Katphalam, Haridra, Daru-Haridra, Ximva, Saptachchhada, Malati, and Trayamana form the Lakshadi Gana. Metrical Text — This consists of astringent, : bitter and sweet taste (Rasa) and acts as a good vermifuge and a purifying (aseptic) agent in cases of bad, malignant or indolent ulcers. Diseases due to the deranged Kapham and Pittam prove amenable to its curative properties, which extend to cases of cutaneous affections (Kushtham) as well. Now we shall describe Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHANAM. ^^^ the five groups of medicinal roots (Mulam), each consisting of similar number of components. The Svalpa Panchamulam Croup :— The group known as the mmor group of five roots (Svalpa-Pancha-Mula) consists of the roots of medicinal plants known as the Trikantaka, the two species of Vrihati, Prithakparni, and Vidarigandha. lYIetrical Texts — The compound possesses a : taste blended of astringent, bitter and sweet. It is a tonic and aphrodisiac, subdues the deranged Yayu and proves soothing to the deranged Pittam. The IVlahat Panchamula Croup:— The one known as the great or the major group of five medicinal roots (Mahat-Pancha-Mula) consists of the roots of such trees as Vilva, Agnimantha, Tuntuka, Patala and Kashmari. Metrical Texts :— It is bitter in taste and subdues the deranged Kapham and Vatam. It is light (easily digestible) and appetising, and acquires a sub- sequent sweet taste in its reaction (Anurasa). The Dashamula Croup :— The two preceding groups in combination form the one techni- cally known as the Dasha-Mulam (the ten roots), which is possessed of the virtue of destroying the deranged Vata, Pittam and Kapham. It proves beneficial in cases of asthma and difficult respiration. It acts as a good 356 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. [ Chap. XXXVIII. digestant in respect of undigested lymph chyle, etc and is used with satisfactory results in all types of fever. The Valli-Panchamulam Group:— The group consisting of the roots of the five medicinal creepers known as Vidari, Sariva, Rajani, Guduchi and Aja-Shringi, is called the Valli-Panchamulam. The Pancha-kantakam Groups— Simi- larly, the group consisting of the five medicinal (thorny) shrubs known as Karamradda, Trikantaka, Sairiyaka, Shatavari, and Gridhranakhi, is called the Pancha- Kantaka. Metrical Texts — The two preceding groups : prove curative in Hcemoptysis and in all the tliree types of anasarca or cedema (Shopha). Moreover, it has the incontestable virtue of arresting all sorts of urethral discharges and is a potent remedy in all cases of seminal disorders. The Pancha-Trina Group :- The group consisting of the five medicinal herbs (of the grass species) and known as Kusha, Kasha, Nala, Darbha, Kandekshuka, is called the Pancha-Trina. Metrical Texts — Cases of Haemoptysis, renal : defects or of uninary diseases are found to speedily yield to the curative efficacy of the compound internally administered through the medium of cow's milk. Metrical Texts -.—The first two of the afore- Chap. XXXVIII.] SUTRASTHA'NAM. 357 said groups of Panchamulas (viz., the Svalpa and the Vrihat Panchamulas) are possessed of the virtue of destroying the deranged Vata, while the one standing in the bottom of the list (Trina-Panchamula) is endued with the property of killing the deranged Pittam. Those stand- ing third and fourth in order of enumeration (the Valli and Kantaka Panchamulas) subdue the deranged Kapham. The groups of medicinal drugs and roots have thus been briefly described, which will be more elaborately dealt with later on in the chapter on Therapeutics. An intelligent physician should prepare plasters, decoctions, medicated oils, Ghritas (medicated clarified butter) or potions, according to the exigencies of each individual case.* The groups enumerated above should be therapeutically used according to the nature of the deranged humours involved in each individual case. Only two, three or four drugs of the same medicinal group, or a similar number of drugs chosen from the the different groups, or a group of medicinal drugs in its entirety, or in combination with another, should be used according to the indications of any particular case, as the physician, in his discretion, would determine. * Additional Text : — These drugs may be duly culled in all seasons of the year, and should be stored in a room protected from smoke, blasts of cold, wind and rain. Thus ends the thirty-eighth Chapter of the Sutrasth^nam in the Sushruta Samhit5, which deals with the classification of drugs according to their therapeutical use.
