[[cite: Sushruta Samhita, Sutrasthanam, Chapter 3]]
Now we shall discuss the chapter which deals with the classification of the Ayurveda and the order [in which the venerable Dhanvantari discoursed on them to his pupils]. Adhyayana-Samprada'niyam. It has been stated before, that a hundred and twenty chapters have been distributed among the five parts or subdivisions (of the present work, in the following- order :— Forty six in the part of Definitive Aphorisms (Sutra-Sthanam) ; sixteen in the part dealing with the Etiology of diseases (Nidanam) ; ten in the part explain- ing the Anatomy and physiology of the human body (Sharira Sthanam); forty in the part of Therapeutics Ciiikitsitam ; and eight in the part dealing with poisons and their antidotes (Kalpa-Sthauam). In addition to these the Uttara-Tantram consists of sixty-six chapters. Metrical texts : The Sutra-Sthanam which contains tbrty-six chapters, is so called because it dis'jusses in the form of hints, arranges in the form of aphorisms and connects by links topics relating to longevitv. Chapter i Describes the origin of the science of the Ayurveda. 2 Relates to the formal initiation of a inipil into the science of medicine. ' ; Deals with the 22 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. I Chap. III. classi^cation and order of the study of the Ayurveda. 4 Dwells on general interpretations and explanations of subjects studied, 5 Treats of preliminary preparations for surgical operations. 6 Deals with seasons and their influence on health and drugs. 7 Treats of surgical appliances. 8 Describes surgi(l:al instruments. 9 Gives practical instructions for surgical operations. 10 Dwells on the duties of medical men preliminary to their commencing practice. 1 1 Pharmacy of alkalies (potential cauteries). 12 Cauteries and the rules to be observed in their use. 13 Leeches how and which to use). 14 Blood. 15 Dwells on the study of development and non-development of the humorous constituents of the body and excrements, 1 The ceremony of piercing the lobules of the ears. 17 How to distinguish between suppurating and non- suppurating swellings. 18 Dressings and bandages of ulcers. 19 The management of patients with ulcers, etc. 20 The salutary and non-salutary effects of regimen, etc. ?.i The decisive modes in the treatment of sores, etc. 22 The opening of abscesses, etc. 2S General rules to be observed in the treat- ment of curable and incurable (surgical diseases. 24 The nature of diseases in general. 25 The (eight different) ways of using surgical instruments. 26 The exploration of splinters lost (deep seated; in the body. 2J The extraction of splinters. 28 How to know favourable' and unfavourable terminations Chap. III. ] SUTRASTHANAM. o- in surgical diseases. 29 The favourable or unfavourable prognosis in diseases as' known from messengers, omens and dreams. 30 Prognosis from the per- version of sense perception. 31 Prognosis based on the altered condition of features, etc. 32 Prognosis based on the perversion in the external appearances of the body. 33 Palliative treatment of incurable diseases. 34 The precautions to be taken (against dangers, such as poisoning of water, etc. by a medical man for the safety of a king whose army is on the march. 35 Clinical observations made b}' phy- sicians. ^6 Miscellaneous subjects connected with the treatment of injuries and surgical diseases. ^y The examination of the soil for the selection of vegetable products growing on it to be used as medicines. 38 Classification of drugs according to their therapeutical uses.; 39 The two classes of drugs which cleanse the system [by evacuating bad humours] and drugs which pacify the irritated humours. 40 Drugs, their flavours, properties and maturity. 41 The properties of drugs specially considered. 42 Flavours. 43 The choice of emetics. 44 The choice of purgatives. 45 Liquids. 46 Food and drink. From their investigatmg the (pathological) causes and symptoms of diseases, they 'are called Nidananij (etiology) and are sixteen in number. 24 THP: SUSHRL'IA SAiMHlTA. [Chap. III. » Chapter i Causes and S5''niptoms of diseases caused b}' wind. 2 Hoemorrhoids. 3 Urinaiy calculi 4 Fistulas. 5 Skin diseases Kushtha), 6 Urethral discharges. 7 .Abdominal tiVmours and dropsy. 8 Abortion and unnatural labours. g Abscesses. 10 ErN'sipelas and Carbuncles. 1 1 Tumours 12 Scrotal tumours. 13 Fractures 'and disl(>."ations) 14 Diseases of the male organ of generation caused by Shuka. 15 Minor .and _ mis- cellaneous diseases. 16 Diseases of the mouth. The great sage has devoted ten chapters to the subject of Anatomy and Physiology (Sharira-Sthanam) for medical men and contemplative saints to learn the component parts of the human body. They are : — Chapter i Cosmology. 2 Healthy and un- healthy) condition of male and female germs. 3 Development of the foetus. 4 Analytical descrip- tion of the fetus. 5 Component parts of the body. 6 Investigation of each vital part. 7 Description of the veins. 8 \'enesection. g Arteries. 10 Pregnancy (child-birth and management of womt.-n in child-birtli and of children). The division of Therapeutics, (Chikitsitam) includes (amongst others; the modes of treating diseases by medicines, expiatory ceremonies, propitiatory rites, and tranquillizing efforts. Torty chapters have been devoted to this division. Chapter i 'Prcatment of two varieties Chap. III. J SUTRASTHANAM. 25 of ulcers. 2 Treatment of instant wounds and ulcers resulting therefrom, 3 Fractures and dislocations. 4 Diseases of wind. 5 Grievous maladies caused by wind. 6 Haemorrhoids. 7 Urinary calculi. 8 Fistulas. 9 Skin diseases. 10 Grievous skin diseases. 11 Urethral 9 discharges. 12 Warts, pustules and sores caused by urethral discharges, 13 Diabetes. 14 Abdominal Dropsy. 15 Abortions and unnatural hibours. 16 Ab- scesses. 17 Erysipelas and Carbuncles. 18 Tumours. 19 Scrotal tumours and Syphilis. 20 Minor diseases. 21 Diseases of the male genital organ caused bv Shuka. 22 Diseases of the mouth. 2^ Swellings. 24 Prophylactic treatment against diseases in general. 2=) Miscellaneous diseases. 26 Tonics for virile debility. 27 Tonics for general debility. 2S Remedies for increasing mental powers and duration of life. 2g Remedies for innate maladies. 30 Means for removing wordly distresses. 31 Treatment of diseases where oleaginous substances are useful. ^^2 Treatment by diaphoretics. 33 Emetics and Purgatives. J4 Treatment for mishaps from the injudicious use of emetics and purgatives. 35 Nozzles and pipes, and enema apparatus. ^6 Mishaps from injudicious use of enemas. 37 Enemas and injections. ^S Clysters. 39 Treatment of complications in general. 40 Inhalation, fumigations, gargarismata, etc. From their proposing remedies against poisons, they are called Kalpas, and are eight in number. 4 46 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. I Chap. ill. ChUpter I Preservation of food. 2 A'egetable and inorganic poisons. 3 Poisons from organic creation. 4 Snake poison. 5 Treatment of snake-bites. 6 Rat- bite and its treatment. 7 Emitting the sound ol kettle-drums (for the eh'mination of poison). 8 Antidotes for and treatment of venomous insect-stings. Thus a synopsis of one hundred and twenty chapters has been given. Now here follows the supplementary division called after its own name (Uttara-Tantram). The Chapter on Sympathetic diseases is placed first, as this division has for its main object the description of such diseases and their treatment. 2 Diseases of the joinings (margin of the eyelids) of the eyeball. 3 Dis- eases of the eyelids. 4 The Sclerotic of the eye. 5 The Cornea. 6. The eyeball, as a whole. 7 Diseases of the pupil. 8 Treatment of eye diseases. 9 Prophylac- tic and curative treatment of wind affections of the eye and ophthalmia. 10 Treatment of Bile affections of the eye and ophthalmia. 1 1 Treatment of Phlegm affec- tions of the eye and ophthalmia. 1 2 Treatment of Blood affections of the eye. 13 Treatment of aftections in which scarification is needed. 14 Treatment in which paracentesis is needed. 15 Treatment by incisions. 16 Entropium and ectropium. 17 Treatment of the diseases of the pupil and vision. 18 General rules regarding ophthalmic medicine and surgery. 19 Treat- ment of traumatic affections of the eyeballs. 20 General Chap. III. I SUTRASTHA'NAM. 27 signs and s3nnptoins of ear diseases. 2 1 Treatment ol ear diseases. 22 Signs and S3'mptoms of nose affections. 2}, Treatment of nose affections. 34 Treat- ment of nasal catarrli. 25 Signs ai^d sj'mptoms of cranial diseases. 26 Ti;eatment of cranial affections. These (twenty-six ciiapters) form the end of the eight divisions of the A^'urveda, called Shilikyam. Chapter 2-] Signs of diseases caused by the Nava- grahas. 28 Prophylactic treatment of diseases caused by Skandha. 29 Treatment of convulsions caused by Skandha. 30 Treatment of Sakuni affections. 31 Treat- ment of Revati affections. },2 Treatment of Putana. 33 Treatment of Andha Putana. 34 Treatment of Slueta-Putana. 35 Treatment of Mukhamandika. 36 Treatment of Naigamesha. i"] Origin of the nine Grahas. 38 Diseases of the Vagina (and internal female genital organs). These twelve chapters together Vvith what is included in (the last chapter of the division on anatomy, form the fifth division of the A5'urveda) called Kaumara Tantram. Chapter 39 Fevers and their treatment. 40 Enteric Catarrh and its treatment. 41 Consumption and its treatment. 42 Diseases of the abdominal glands and their treatment. 43 Diseases of the heart 'Angina Pectoris etc. 44 Anaemia and allied diseases and their treatment. 45 HfCmorrhag^c affections and their treatment. 46 Apoplectic diseases and their treatment. 2-8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA'. 1 Chap. ill. 47 Diseases from excessive drinking and their treatment. 48 Symptoms, causes, and treatment of excessive thirst. 49 Causes, S5'mptoms and treatment of vomiting. 50 Causes, s5^mptoms and treatment of Hiccough. 51 Causes, symp- toms, and treatment of Dyspnoea. 52 Causes, symp- toms and treatment of cough. 53 Aphonia. 54 Entozoa. 55 Causes, symptoms and treatment of retention of excrements. 56 Causes, symptoms and treatment of Dyspeptic and Choleric diarrhoea.' 57 Anorexia and its treatment. 58 Causes, symptoms and treatment of cystic and urethral affections. 59 Causes and treatment of urine diseases. These twenty one chapters describe the remaining diseases of Kayachikitsa ; (which forms the third division of the Ayurveda \ Chapter 60 Causes, symptoms and treatment of diseases caused by superhuman powers. 61 Causes svmptoms and treatment of Epilepsy. 62 Mania. These three chapters form the Bhuta Vidya (the fourth division of the Ayurveda). Chapter 63 on the different varieties of flavour. 64 (leneral rules for the preservation of health. 65 Deductions and inunctions drawn from tbe texts and study of the Ayurveda. 66 On the varieties of mor- bid elements (h^^mours;. These four chapters are to be understood as being supplementary, and as orna- ments to this division. Chap. III. j SUTRASTHANAM. 20 This last division from its superiority over the others, the great sages have called the Excellent (Uttarani). From the information it gives on varied subjects, it is called the best, the permanent and ihe last. In this division which is called the last, there are included four divisions (of the Ayiirveda) viz, Shalakyam, (treatment of diseases of parts situated above the clavicles), 2 Kaumarabhrit^'am (management of children), 3 Kayachikitsa general diseases) and 4 Bliuta-Vidya. The division (named) Vajeekaranam (on the strength- ening of virile power, etc.) and Rasayanam remedies preserving vigor, etc.) have been included in the (fourth ) division (of this treatise called Chikitsa. The doctrine of antidotes comes under the head of Kalpa of this treatise and Shah'am surgery is incident- ally treated throughout the book. Thus these are the eight limbs divisions, of tne Science of Medicine proclaimed to the world by the original god. Those, who stU'ly them with due care and make use of the knowledge with caution, shall preserve the li\'es of men on this earth. It is imperatively necessary that the book should be read ; and after having read it one should attend to the practice (of the science . The physician who has learnt these both, is lit to be honour- ed by kings, 30 THE SUSHKUTA SAiMHlTA. f Chap. III. Authoritative verses on the sub- ject :— A ph^'sician, well versed in the principles of the science of medicine (Ayurveda), but unskilful in his art through want of practice, loses his wit at the bedside of his patient, just as, a coward is at his wit's end to determine what to do when for the first time he finds himself in the ranks of a contending army. On the other hand a physician, experienced in his art l)ut deficient in the knowledge of the Ayurveda, is condemned by all good men as a quack, and deserves capital punishment at the hands of the king. Both these classes of ph3^sicians are not to be trusted, because th}- are inexpert and half educated. Such men are incapable of discharging the duties of their vocation, just as a one-winged bird is incapable of taking flight in the air. Even a panacea or a medicine of ambrosial virtues administered b)' an unpractised or ig- norant ph)^sician, will prove j^ositively baneful as a draught of poison, or a blow with a weapon, or a thunder- bolt. A physician, ignorant of the science and art of sur- gery and emollient measures Sneha-karma , etc. is but a killer of men out of cupidity, and who is allowed to carry on his nefarious trade only through the in- advertence of the king. A physician well --ersed in the principles of surger}-, and experienced in the prac- tice of medicine, is alone caj^able of curing distempers, just as only a two- wheeled cart can be of service in a field of battle. Chap. III. SUTRASTHANAM. 31 Now hear me, O child, describe the mode of st'adying the present science of the Ayurveda.) The pupil having worshipped and recited his daily prayers should calmly sit near his preceptor, pure in body and mind, who should teach him a full i^hloka or couplet of the Ayurveda), or a half or a quarter part thereof, adapted to his intellectual capacity. Then he should make a full and elaborate paraphrase of the recited couplet or any piwi thereof, and ask his pupils individually to do the same. When the pupils have paraphrased the same to the satisfaction of the precep- tor, he should again recite the same stanza or couplet. The passages or shlokas should not be recited too hastily, nor drawled out in a timid or faltering voice, nor with a nasal intonation. The voice should be neither too loud, nor too weak, but each sound should be clearly and distinctly uttered, and the lips, the eyes, the eye- brows, and the hands, etc. should not be lifted or moved to keep time with the recitation. Xo one should be allowed to pass between the pupil and the preceptor at the time of study. Authoritative verses on the sub- ject — A pupil who is pure, obedient to his : preceptor, applies himself steadily to his work, and abandons laziness and excessive sleep, will arrive at the end of the science (he has been studying . .\ student or a pupil, having 'finished tire course ol. 32 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. L Chap. III. his studies, would do well to attend to the cultivation ol" fine speech and constant practice in the art he has learnt, and make unremitting efforts towards the attainment of perfection (in the art). Thus ends the ihird Chapter uf the Siilraslhanani in the Sushrul.i Sanihila wliich deals with the Classification of tlie Ayurveda.
