Chapter 6 Annaswaroopa अ न वो प व ानीय Food
Stuff

The sixth chapter of Astanga Hridaya is called as Annaswaroopa Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. It deals
with details of different food materials. The chapter covers corns, grains, legumes, pulses,
prepared foods, non veg food, leafy vegetables, fruits, salts and medicinal herbs.


Shuka Dhanya Varga – Group of corns with spikes –

अथ शूकधा य वगः
र तो महान ् सकलम तूणकः शकुना तः
सारामख
     ु ो द घशक
             ु ो रो शूकः सग
                          ु ि धकः १
पु   ः पा डुः पु डर कः   मोदो गौरसा रवौ
का चनो म हषः शूको द ूषकः कुसुमा डकः २
ला गला लोहवाला याः कदमाः शीतभी काः
पत गा तपनीया च ये चा ये शालयः शुभाः ३

Types of rice – Rakta (red), mahan (big sized rice), kalama, turnaka, shakunahruta, saaramukha,
deerghashuka (having long sharp spike at the ends), sugandhika (having good smell),
rodhrashuka, pundra, pandu, pundarika, Pramoda, Gaura (white rice), Sariva, Kanchana (golden
colored rice), mahisha, Shuka, Dushaka, Kusumandaka, Langala Lohavala, Kardama,
Sheetabheeruka, Patanga, stapaneeya (bright red) – these varieties of rice are good for
consumption. - 1-3


Qualities and health benefits of rice – which one is best?

 वाद ुपाकरसाः ि न धा व ृ या ब ा पवचसः
कषायानुरसाः प या लघवो मू ला हमाः ४

Svadu rasa – sweet taste
Swadu paka – sweet taste conversion after digestion
Snigdha – unctuous
Vrushya – natural aphrodisiac
Baddhalpavarchasaha – causes mild constipation, causes lesser volume of faeces
Kashaya anurasa – mild astringent taste
Pathya – suitable for daily consumption
Laghu – light to digest
Mutrala – diuretic, increases urine volume
Hima – coolant


          Page No. 68                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
शूकजेषु वर त       र त त ृ णा दोषहा
महा तमनु कलम तं चा यनु ततः परे ५

Red variety of rice is the best quality (Raktashali). It relieves thirst and balances all the three
Doshas.
Next best to it is Mahan (big sized rice) variety. Next to it is Kalama variety, and the chronology
continues, as in Verse 1 – 3.

यवका हायनाः पांसुबा पनैषधकादयः
 वद ू णा गरु वः ि न धाः पाके अमलाः ले म प तलाः ६
स ृ टमू पुर षा च पूव पूव च नि दताः

Yavaka, Haayana, Paamshu, Vashpa, Naishadha varieties of rice are
Svadu – sweet,
Ushna – hot in potency,
Guru – hard to digest,
Shleshmapittala – increases Kapha and Pitta
Snigdha (unctuous, oily)
Amlapaka – undergoes sour taste conversion after digestion
Srushtamutrapureesha – increases bulk and volume of faeces and urine
They are bad in their reverse order.


Shashtika Shali – Paddy which matures in 60 days -

ि न धो     ा ह लघुः    वाद ुि   दोष नः ि थरो हमः ७
षि टको    ी हषु     े ठो गौर चा सतगौरतः

Shashtika shali – the paddy which matures in 60 days is best among all paddy. It is
Snigdha - unctuous, oily
Grahi – absorbent, useful in mal-absorption syndrome and diarrhea
Laghu (light to digest)
Svadu – sweet
Tridoshaghna – balances all the three Doshas
Sthira – brings in stability
Hima –coolant

It is of two types – Gaura – white and Asita-gaura (blackish white).

ततः    मा महा ी हकृ ण ी हजतूमुखाः ८
कु कुटा डकलावा यपारावतकशूकराः
वरको ालको         वाल ीनशारददद राः
                               ु   ९
ग धनाः कु व दा च ग ुणैर पा तराः          म ृताः


          Page No. 69                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Next inferior to shashtika is mahavrihi, next to that is krishnavrihi and the others such as jatu
mukha, kukkutandaka, lavaka, paravataka, sukara, varaka, uddalaka, ujvala, cina, sarada, dardura,
gandhana and kuruvinda. 7 b- 10 a

 वाद ुर ल वपाको अ यो       ी हः प तकरो गु ः १०
बहुमू पुर षो मा,    दोष   वेव पाटलः

The other types of rice are – sweet in taste, sour at the end of digestion, increases Pitta and are
hard to digest. It increases volume of urine and faeces, increases body heat and causes imbalance
of Tridosha. – 10 – 11


Truna dhanya Varga – group of grains produced by grass like plants –

क गक
   ु ो वनीवार यामाका द हमं लघु ११
त ृणधा यं पवनकृ लेखनं कफ प त त ्

Kangu, Kodrava, Neevara, Shyamaka and other grains are cold in potency, easily digestible,
increases Vata, Lekhana (scraping, scarificient) and balance Kapha and Pitta. – 11

भ नस धानकृ त          य गब
                         ु हणी
                           ृ   गु ः १२
कोरद ूषः परं   ाह    पश शीतो वषापहः

Of them, Priyangu helps in fracture healing, nutritive, nourishing and is hard to digest.
Koradusha is grahi (absorbent), coolant and anti-poisonous.


(Yava) Barley benefits

    ः शीतो ग ु ः    वाद ुः सरो व वातकृत ् यवः १३
व ृ यः   थैयकरो मू मेदः प तकफान ् जयेत ्
पीनस वासकासो        त भक ठ वगामयान ् १४

Yava (Barley) is
Rooksha (dry)
Sheeta – cold
Guru (Heavy to digest)
Svadu – Madhura (sweet)
Sara – promotes bowel movements
Vit-vata krut – it increases the bulk of faeces and causes flatus
Vrushya – natural aphrodisiac
Stairyakrut – increases body stability

Useful in
Mutrameda – urinary disorder
Pitta – Kapha imbalance disorders

          Page No. 70                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Peenasa – running nose, rhinitis
Shwasa – Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty
Kasa – cough, cold
Urusthamba – thigh stiffness
Kantaroga – diseases of throat
Twakroga – skin diseases – 13 – 14

 यूनो यवादनुयवः       ो णो वंशजो यवः

Anuyava ( a small sized barley) is inferior in qualities to that of Yava. Venuyava (seeds of
bamboo) is non- unctuous and hot in potency. 15


Godhuma – Wheat benefits –

व ृ यः शीतो गु ः ि न धो जीवनो वात प तहा १५
स धानकार मधुरो गोधूमः        थैय कृत ् सरः
प या न द मुखी शीता कषायमधुरा लघुः १६

Wheat is
Vrushya – natural aphrodisiac
Sheeta – cold
Guru (Heavy to digest)
Snigdha – unctuous, oily
Jivaniya – enlivening
Vatapittaha – balances Vata and Pitta
Sandhanakari – heals fractures and wounds
Madhura (sweet)
Sthairyakrut – increases body stability
Sara – promotes bowel movements
Pathya – can be had on daily basis

Nandimukhi variety of wheat is good for health. It is
Sheeta – cold
Kashaya (astringent)
Madhura (sweet)
And Laghu (light to digest) 16

इ त शक
     ू धा यवगः


          Page No. 71                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shimbidhanya varga – (group of legumes and pulses):-

अथ श बीधा यवगः
मु गाढक मसरू ा द श बीधा यं वब धकृत ्
कषायं   वाद ु स    ाह कटुपाकं हमं लघु       १७
मेदः ले मा     प तेषु हतं लेपोपसेकयोः

Mudga (green gram) , adhaki (toor dal), masura(lentil) and other varieties belong to the group
called shimbidhanya (those having pods/legumes).
Vibandhakrut – They cause constipation,
Kashaya, Swadu – astringent sweet in taste,
Grahi – absorbent,
Katu vipaka – pungent after digestion,
Sheeta – cold in potency,
Laghu – easily digestible,
mitigate fat, kapha, asra (blood) and pitta, suited for use as external application and bathing the
body parts etc. 17-18 a

वरो अ    मु गो अ पचलः, कलाय          व तवातलः १८
राजमाषो अ नलकरो          ो बहुशकृ गु ः

Among them, mudga (green gram) is best, it causes mild increase of chala (vata):
kalaya (round pea) causes vata and dryness, produces more faeces and is hard to digest 18
Rajamasha (big sized black gram) increases Vata, it is dry, heavy to digest and increases bulk of
faeces.


Horse gram benefits –

उ णाः कुल थाः पाके अ लाः शु ा म वासपीनसान ् १९
कासाशः कफवातां च       नि त प त दाः परम ्

Kulttha (horse gram) is
Ushna – hot in potency,
Amlapaka – sour at the end of digestion,
cleanses semen, useful in
urinary stones,
Shwasa – Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty
Peenasa – running nose, rhinitis
Kasa – cough, cold
Kapha – Vata diseases
But it increases bleeding disorders and is not recommended in such conditions, like menorrhagia.
19


          Page No. 72                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Nishpava (flat bean)

न पावो वात प ता         त यमू करो गु ः २०
सरो वदाह       शु कफशोष वषापहः

Nishpava (flat bean) aggravates vata, pitta, bleeding disorders,
it increases breast milk production and promotes urine formation. It is
Guru (Heavy to digest)
Sara – promotes bowel movements
Vidahi – increases burning sensation
It is not good for eyes and semen quality.
It decreases Kapha, inflammation and is useful in poisoning. 20


Masha – Black gram benefits:

माषः ि न धो बल ले म मल प तकरः सरः २१
गु णो अ नलहा       वाद ुः शु व ृ   वरे ककृत ्

Black gram is
Snigdha – unctuous,
Balya – increases strength,
increases kapha and Pitta
Malakara – increases bulk of faeces,
Sara – laxative,
Guru – not easily digestible,
Ushna – hot in potency,
Vatahara – mitigate Vata,
Madhura – sweet in taste,
shukra vruddhikara, Virekakrut – increases semen and promotes ejaculation strength. 21

फला न माषव व या काका डोला मगु तयोः

Fruits of kakandola and atmagupta (Mucuna pruriens) are similar to black gram in qualities. 22


Sesame seed benefits:

उ ण    व यो हमः      पश के यो ब यि तलो गु ः
अ पमू ः कटुः पाके मेधा अि नकफ प तकृत ् २३


Tila (sesamum) is
Ushna – hot in potency ,
Tvachya – good for the skin,
Sheetasparsha – cold on touch,
Keshya – good for hairs,

         Page No. 73                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Balya – strengthening,
Guru – hard to digest,
Alpamutra – produces little quantity of urine,
Katu paka – pungent at the end of digestion
Medhakrut – increases intelligence,
Agnikrut – increases digestive function,
and increases kapha and pitta. 23


Seeds of uma (linseed)

ि न धोमा    वाद ु त तो णा कफ प तकर गु ः
   शु    कटुः पाके, त वत ् बीजं कुसम
                                   ु भजम ् २४

Seeds of uma (linseed) is
Snigdha unctuous,
Madhura Tikta – sweet – bitter in taste,
Ushna – hot in potency,
increases kapha and pitta, hard to digest, not good for vision and semen,
pungent at the end of digestion.
Similar are the seeds of kusumbha. 24

माषो अ     सव ववरो, यवकः शूकजेषु च

Masa (black gram) in the group of simbija (legumes) and yavaka (small barley) in the group of
sukaja (cereals) are inferior.

नवं धा यम भ यि द, लघु संव सरो षतम ्
शी ज म तथा सू यं न तुषं युि तभिजतम ्

Fresh grains (just harvested) are abhisyandi (causes excess exudation from tissue pores and
block them by it), those old by one year are easily digestible.
Those which grow quickly, those which are removed of their husk, those that are properly fried
are also easy to digest. 25

इ त श बीधा यवगः

Thus ends the group of shimbi dhanyas (legumes).


         Page No. 74                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Kritannna varga- (group of prepared foods)

अथ कृ ता न / प वा न वगः
म डपेया वले पीनां ओदान य च लाघवम ् २६
यथापूव शव त          म डो वातानुलोमनः
त ृ ला नदोषशेष नः पाचनो धातस
                           ु ा यकृत ् २७
 ोतोमादवकृ         वे द स धु य त चानलम ्

Manda, peya, vilepi and odana are preparations of rice or other grains cooked in water.

Manda - The thin fluid resembling water, drained out immediately after boiling is known as
manda;
Peya – slightly thicker to manda but still only liquid is peya;
Vilepi – the next stage with more of solid grain and less of fluid is called vilepi and
Odana – the last stage which is solid without fluid portion is known as odana.

Manda, peya, vilepi and odana are more easily digestible in their preceding order of enumeration.
Manda – easiest to digest. Odana – is comparatively harder to digest.

Manda – (thin fluid drained out) Manda is the best. It causes easy movement of faeces and flatus,
relieves thirst and exhaustion, It nullifies residual doshas. Hence it is used as diet after
Panchakarma, wherein all the Doshas are eliminated.
Manda helps digestion, restores the normalcy of the tissues, causes softness of the channels,
perspiration and kindles the digestive activity. 26-27 ½

 ु त ृ णा ला नदौब यकु       रोग वरापहा २८
मलानुलोमनी प या पेया द पनपाचनी

Peya (more liquid, less solid) relieves hunger, thirst, exhaustion, debility, diseases of the
abdomen and fevers, if it causes easy elimination of faeces, good for all, kindles appetite and
helps digestion. 28

वलेपी      ा हणी      या त ृ णा नी द पनी हता २९
 णा      रोगसंशु द ुबल नेहपा यनम ्

Vilepi (less liquid more solid) withholds discharge of fluids from the body, good for the heart,
relieves thirst, kindles appetite, ideal for all, especially for those suffering from ulcers, eye
diseases, those who have been administered Panchakarma purification therapies, who are weak
and who have been given fats for drinking as part of Snehana therapy (before Panchakarma). 29

सुधौतः     स ृतः ि व नो अ य तो मा चौदनो लघुः
य चा नेय ौषध वाथसा धतो भ ृ टत डुलः
वपर तो गु ः         ीरमांसा यैय च सा धतः


           Page No. 75                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Odana (solid) prepared with grains which have been washed well, in which the entire water has
evaporated and which is devoid of hot fumes is easy to digest; likewise that prepared along with
addition of decoction of medicinal substances of hot potency or that prepared with fried grains
are also easily digestible; the opposite of these that prepared with addition of milk, muttom etc.,
are hard to digest.

इत        य    यायोगमाना यैः सवमा दशेत ्

In this manner, the effects of the grain, kind of processing, admixtures, quantity and other aspects
should all be determined. 30-31 ½


Mamsa rasa (meat soup)
बं ृहणः   ीणनो व ृ य च ु यो     णहो रसः

Mamsa rasa (meat soup) is
Brihmana – nourishing
Preenana – gives satisfaction,
Vrushya – aphrodisiac,
Chakshushya – good for the eye (vision) and
Vranaha – heals ulcers and wounds. 32


Mudgasupa (soup of green gram)

मौ ग तु प यः संशु           णक ठा   रो गणाम ्

Mudgasupa (soup of green gram) is good for health, for those who have undergone
Panchakarma purification threrapies and for those suffering from ulcers, diseases of the throat
and eyes. 32 ½


Kulattha Supa (horse gram soup)

वातानल
     ु ोमी कौल थो गु मतन
                       ू ी तू निजत ्

Kulattha Supa (horse gram soup) is
Vatanulomi – initiates normal movement of Vata
Useful in
Gulma (abdominal tumor), tuni and pratituni (pains of the groin region) 33


              Page No. 76                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Eatables prepared from Tila (sesamum)

तल प याक वकृ तः शु कशाकं व ढकम ्
शा डाकोवटकं        नं दोषलं लपनं गु

Eatables prepared from Tila (sesamum), Pinyaka (residue of sesamum after the oil is taken
out), dried leafy vegetables, germinated grains, shandaki vataka (balls of fried rice dried in sun
and then fried in oil) are not good for eyes, increase the doshas, cause debility and are hard to
digest. 34
Hence, Ayurveda does not recommend germinated grains.


Rasala –

रसाला बंहृ णी व ृ या ि न धा ब या         च दा ।

Rasala – curds churned and added with pepper powder and sugar- it causes body weight increase,
it is aphrodisiac, unctuous, improves strength and improves taste.


Panaka (vegetable / fruit juice)

 म ुत ् त ृ     लमहरं पानकं    ीणनं गु     ॥३५॥
व टि भ मू लं        यं यथा    यगुणं च तत ् ।

Relieves exhaustion, hunger, thirst and fatigue, gives satisfaction. It is generally hard to digest,
stays long in the stomach, is diuretic and good to the heart. Its properties depends on material
from which it is prepared. 35


Laja (fried paddy)

लाजा त ृ      छ यतीसार मेहमे द: कफि छद: ॥३६॥
कास प तोपशमना द पना लघवो हमा: ।

Laja is prepared by frying paddy. Relieves thirst, vomiting, diarrhea, diabetes, obesity, mitigates
kapha, cough and pitta, increases appetite, easy to digest and cold in potency. 36

प ृथुका ग ुरवो ब या: कफ व ट भका रण: ॥३७॥

Prithuka (parboiled and flaked paddy) is hard to digest, strengthening increases kapha and
causes constipation. Prithuka is prepared by boiling paddy for short while and pounding it with
pestle and mortar. 37


           Page No. 77                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
धाना व टि भनी             ा तपणी लेखनी गु : ।

Dhana (fried barely and other grains) stays long in the stomach causing indigestion, is dry,
satisfying, scarifying, and hard to digest. Dhana is made by frying barely which is soaked in
water and saktu is flour either raw or fried.


Saktu (corn flour)

स तवो लघवः         ु तृ    मने ामय णान ् 38
 नि त स तपणाः पान स य एव बल दाः
नोदका त रता न         वन नशायां न केवलान ् 39
न भु   वा न     वजैि छ वा स तून या न वा बहून ्

Corn flour is easy to digest, relieves hunger, thirst, fatigue , eye diseases and wounds, is
nutritious and taken as a drink gives strength immediately.
Corn flour should not be eaten without drinking water in between,
should not be consumed twice in a day
Should not be had at night
Should not be taken solely, without other kinds of foods.
Should not be had after meals
It should not be hard to chew and it should not had in excess quantity. 38-39
Many tasty eatables are prepared from the flour of rice and other cereals, horse gram, bengal
gram and other legumes, with addition of spices, sour and fragrant substances, some of them are
boiled in water, some are steamed, some are fried in oil etc, vegetables like onions, brinjals, etc.
are also used in some preparations. These are usually consumed as side–dishes or snacks in
between meals. However in view of their difficult digestibility, some warnings have been
enumerated above.

प याको लपनो               ो व ट भी   ि टदष
                                         ू ण: ॥४०॥

Pinyaka produces giddiness, dryness indigestion and vitiates vision. Pinyaka is the residue of
sesamum, groundnut and other oil seeds, after extracting the oil from it.

वेसवारो गु : ि न धो बलोपचयवधन: ।
मु गा दजा तु गुरवो यथा         यगुणानुगा: ॥ ४१॥

Vesavara is meat, cut into minute bits, added with spices like pepper, ginger etc, and roasted or
fried.
Vegetable vesavara is prepared with flour or pulses of various kinds, added with spices etc.
Vesavara is hard to digest, is unctuous, increases strength and builds the body.
Vesavara prepared from green gram and others is hard to digest and possess properties similar to
the material from which it is prepared. 41

कुकूलकपर ा     क      व गार वपा चतान ्
एकयोनीं लघुि व यादपूपानु तरो तरम ्

          Page No. 78                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Eatables cooked by steaming, baked on hot mud or iron pan, in a vessel kept over a stove, inside
a hearth and baked by placing on burning coal directly are easy to digest in the successive order
of their enumeration.
This means, eatables prepared directly over coal is easier to digest than eatables cooked by
steaming. 42

इ त कृता न /प वा न वगः

Thus ends the groups of prepared foods.


Mamsa varga – (group of meats)

ह रणैणकुर ग गोकण म ृगमात ृकाः
शशश बरचा      कशरभा या म ृगाः      म ृताः


Mriga varga (deer etc) :-

Harina (antelope, fawn) Kuranga (type of deer), Arksa (white footed antelope) Gokarna (Deer
antelop), Mrigamatrika (Red coloured hare like deer), Shasha ( rabbit), Shambara (deer with
branched horns), Charushka (gazelle) sarabha (eight footed animal) Etc. are known as Mriga 43.
These are different kinds of deer, antelope and bucks. Some of them are having horns, some are
hornless, all of them are herbivorous and live in dry regions especially shrubby forests. In olden
days they were being hunted mainly for food.

Viskira varga – group of birds which scratch ground with legs to pick food :-

लाववात कवत रर तव मककु कुभाः
क प जलोपच ा यचकोरकु बाहवः
वतको व तका चैव ति त रः         करः शखी
ता ाचड
     ू ा यबकरगोनद ग रव तकाः
तधा शारपरे    ाभवरटा या च वि कराः

Lava (bustard quail), Vartika (bush quail), Vartira (rain quail), Raktavartma (red eyed owl),
Kukkubha (wild cock), Kapinjala (black partridge), Upachakra (small greek pheasant), Chakora
(greek pheasant), Kurubahava, Vartaka (button quail), Vartika( bush quail), Tittiri (grey
partridge), krakara (black partridge), sikhi (peacock), tamracuda (domestic cock), bakara (small
creane), gonarda (siberian crane), girivartika (mountain quail), Sharapada (a kind of sparrow),
indrabha (hedge sparrow), varata (goose) etc. belong to the group known as viskira (birds which
scratch the ground with their legs and picks up their food.) 44-45


         Page No. 79                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pratuda- group of birds which peck the food and eat –

जीव जीवकदा यूहभ ृ गा वशुकसा रकाः
ल वाको कलहर तकपोतचटकादयः

Jivanijivaka (greek partridge ), datyuha (gallinule), bhrunagahwa (shrike), suka (parakeet), sarika
(mynah), latva (wild sparrow), kokila (cuckoo), harita (grey peigon), kapota (wood peigon),
Chataka (house sparrow) etc. belong to the group of pratuda (birds which peck the food and eat).
46


Bileshaya - group of creatures that live in burrows -

 तुदाः भे कगोधा ह वा वदा या बलेशयाः

Bheka (frog), godha (iguana lizard), Ahi, (snake), swavid (hedgehog) etc. are bileshaya (living in
burrows). 47


Prasaha varga – living beings which catch food by teeth, tear and eat :-

गोखरा वतरोष ाि व वी प संह वानराः
माजारमूषक या व ृकब ुतर वः
लोपाकज बुक येनचाषवा तादवायसाः
शश नीभासकुररग ृ ोलूककु ल गकाः
धू मका मधुहा चे त     सहा म ृगप    णः

Go (cow), khara (ass, donkey), aswatara (mule),ustra (camel), ashwa (horse), dwipi (leopard),
Simha (lion), Aruksha (dear), Vanara (monkey), marjala (cat), musaka (rat, mice), Vyaghra
(tiger), Vrka (jackal), babhru (large brown mongoose tarksu (hyena), lopaka (fox, jambuka
(jackal), syena (hawk), casa (blue joy), vantada (dog), vayasa (crow), sasaghni (golden eagle ),
bhasa (bread vulture ), kurara (osprey), grdhra (vulture), uluka (owl), kulingaka (sparrow hawk),
dhumika (owlet), madhuha (honey buzzard), these and other animals and birds belong to the
group known as prasaha (which catch their food by the teeth, tear it and eat.) 48-49 ½


Mahamriga – big animals –

वराहम हष य क        रो हतवारणाः
स ृमर चमरः ख गो गवय च महाम ृगाः

Varaha (boar), mahisa (buffalo), nyanku (dog deer), rohita (big deer), ruru (swamp deer), varana
(elephant), srmara (Indian wild boar), chamara (yak), khadga (rhinoceros) and Gavaya (goyal ox)
are known as mahamriga (animals of huge body). 50


         Page No. 80                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Apchara varga –(aquatic birds) : -

हंससारसकाद बबककार डव लवाः
बलाको    ोषच ा वम गु ौ चादयो अ चराः

Hamsa (swan), sarasa (Indian crane), kadamba (grey legged goose), baka (heron), karandava
(white breasted goose), palva (pelican), balaka (crane),utkrosa (mattard), chakrahva(ruddy
Sheldrake), madgu (small cormorant), krouncha (pound heron) etc. are know as apcara (aquatic
birds ).51


Matsya varga – group of fish -

म   या रो हतापाठ नकूमकु भीरककटाः
शुि तश खो श बूकशफर व म चि            काः
चुलूक न मकर शशुमार त म गलाः
राजी च ल चमा या च मांस म याहुर टधा
म ृ यं वै क रकं क च     ातुदं च बलेशयम ्
 ासहं च महाम ृ यमपचरं मा यम टधा

Rohita (red fish), pathina (boal), kurma (tortoise), kumbhira (gavial, alligator), karkata (crab),
sukti (pearl mussel), sankha (conch shell), urdu (otter), sambuka (comman snail), safari (large
glistening fish), varmi candrika 9a kind of cat fish) culuki 9propoise, seahog ) pakra (crocodile),
makara (crocodile), sisumara (dolphin), timingala (whale , shark), raji (snake fish), cilicima (red
striped fish) and others belongs to group of matsya (fishes). Thus eight kinds of (source of )
mamsa (meat) are enumerated. 52-53 ½

यो न वजावी या म गोचर वाद नि चते

Goat and sheep are not included in any particular group because of their mixed heredity and
living in all types o lands. 54

आ या या जा गलानूपा म यौ साधारणौ              म ृतौ

Out of the eight groups mentioned above, the first three (Mriga, viskriya and pratuda) are also
know as Jangala (Vata dominant); the last three (mahamriga, Jalacara and Matsya), are also
called anupa (Kapha dominant);
The middle two (bilesaya and prasaha) are known as sadharana ( tridosha balancing) 54 ½
The region of land which has dry forests (shrubby) with less rainfall is Jangala, the region. This
region is Vata dominant.
Area with plenty of rainfall and water-logged is anupa (Kapha dominant),
The region which has neither too much of dryness nor too much of moisture is Sadharana
(temperature).
The nature and qualities of the land are also seen in all the flora and fauna of the region.


          Page No. 81                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
त    ब मला: शीता लघवो जा गला हता: ॥५५॥
प तो तरे वातम ये सि नपाते कफानग
                              ु े ।

Meat of the Jangala group are the best , they cause constipation, are cold (in potency), easily
digestible, and good in sannipata with great increase of pitta and moderate increase of vata, mild
increase of kapha following them. 55

द पन: कटुक: पाके      ाह       ो हम: शश: ॥५६॥

The flesh of shasha (rabbit), enhances hunger, pungent after digestion, water absorbent and cold
in potency 56

ईषद ु णगु ि न धा बं ृहण वतकादयः
ति त र ते व प वरो मेधाि नबलशु कृत ्
    ाह व य अ नलो       तसि नपातहरः परम ्

The flesh of the vartaka (button quail) and others are slightly hot in potency, hard to digest,
unctuous and make the body stout. Tittiri (sparrow) is still better, makes for increase of
intelligence, power of digestion, strength and semen, with-holds discharges of fluids from the
body, improves the skin complexion, effectively mitigates sannipata with increase of vata. 57 ½

ना तप यः शखी प यः          ो   वरवयो शाम ्

The flesh of shikhi (peacock) is not very good generally but good for the ears (hearing), voice,
ageing (to slow down ageing), and eyes (vision), 58

त व च कु कुटो व ृ यः       ा य तु ले मलो गु ः
मेधो अ नलकराः        याः    कराः सोपच काः
गु ः सलवणः काणकपोतः सवदोषकृत ्

Flesh of cock (wild fowl), is similar (to that of peacock), and is aphrodisiac; that of the
domesticated fowl increase kapha and is hard to digest; flesh of krakara (black
partridge) increases intelligence and digestion, is good for the heart (or the mind); similar is the
flesh of upachakraka; that of kana kapota is hard to digest, slightly saity and increases all the
doshas. 59 ½

चटकाः    ले मलाः ि न धा वात नाः शु लाः परम ्

Meat of cataka increases kapha, is unctuous, mitigates vata and best to increase semen. 60

गु   णि न धमधुरा वगा चातो यथो तरम ्
मू शु कृतोव ब या वात नाः कफ प तलाः


          Page No. 82                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Flesh of animals of the next succeeding group (bilesaya), are hard to digest, hot in potency,
unctuous and sweet, increases urine and semen, strengthening, mitigates vata and increases kapha
and pitta. 61.

शीता महाम ृगा तेषु      याद सहाः पुनः

Flesh of the mahamrigas (big animals) is cold in potency generally; of them the flesh of
carnivorous and prasaha animals have salt as secondary taste, pungent the end of digestion,
increases the muscles of body, ideally suited for persons suffering from long standing
haemorrhoids, duodenal diseases and consumption 62-62 ½


Aja (goat’s meat)

ना तशीत गु ि न धं मांसम ् आजं अदोषलम ् ॥६३॥
शर रधातुसामा यात ् अन भ यि द बं ृहणम ् ।

Goat meat is not very cold in potency, hard to digest, fatty, does not aggravate the doshas, being
identical with the doshas of the human body, it is anabhisyandi (does not cause increases of
secretions in the tissue channels). It is nourishing, causes weight gain. 63.

वपर तमतो       ेयमा वकं बं ृहणं तु तत ्

Avi (meat of sheep) is opposite in nature with that of goat and causes weight gain. 64

शु ककास मा यि न वषम वरपीनसान ्

Gomamsa (flesh of cow, bull, bullock) cures dry cough, exhaustion, excess hunger, intermittent
fevers, chronic nasal catarrh, emaciation, and diseases caused by increase of vata independently.
65.

उ णो गर या म हषः       व नदा यब ृह वकृत ्

Flesh of mahisa (buffalo) is hot, not easily digestible, produces sleep, strength and stoutness of
the body.

त व वराहः      महा    चशु बल दः

Flesh of varaha (pig) is similar to that of the buffalo, relieves fatigue, increases taste, semen and
strength 66

म   याः परं कफकराः च लचीमि         दोषकृत ्

Fish is general tends to increase kapha greatly chilichima fish tends to increase all the three
dosas.


          Page No. 83                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
लावारो हतगोधै रणः    वे   वे वग वराः परम ्

Lava, rohita, godha and ena-are best in their respective groups. 67

मांसं स योहतं शु ं वय: थं च भजेत ् यजेत ् ।
मत
 ृ ं कृशं भश
           ृ ं मे यं या धवा र वषैह तम ् ॥६८॥

Meat of animals which have been just killed, which are pure (uncontaminated) and of adult
animals only should be used food;
Meat of dead animals, of those which very emaciated, which are very fatty, and of those animals
which are dead due to diseases, water (drowning) and poison should be rejected. 68

पंिु   योः पव
            ू प चाध गु णी, ग भणी गु ः
लघुय ष चत ु पा सु, वह गेषु पुनः पुमान ्
 शरः    क धो प ृ ठ य क याः स        नो च गौरवम ्
तथा आमप वाशययोयथापूव व न दशे त ्
शोणोत भ ृतीनां च धातून ामु तरो तरम ्
मांसा गर यो वष
             ृ णमे व ृ कयकृ गुदम ्
इ त मांसवगः

Meat obtained from the parts above the umbilicus of male animals and from the parts below the
umbilicus of female animals, that obtained from the pregnant animal are all hard to digest.
Among the quadrupeds, the flesh of females is easily digestible but among the birds it is of the
males.

Flesh obtained from the head, neck, thighs, back, waist , forelegs, stomach and intestines are hard
to digest in the reverse order of enumeration. The tissues of the animals such as blood and others
are hard to digest in their successive order; testicles, penis, kidneys, liver and rectum are hard to
digest than the flesh. 69-71.

Thus ends the group of meat.

In ancient India, hunting was very common both for the sake of food and as pastime. Among the
hunted animals and birds belonging to different kinds and nature some were found suitable as
food but some were not. It is difficult to correctly identify some of the animals, birds and fishes
named herein, some of them might have become extinct even.


           Page No. 84                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shaka varga :- (group of leafy vegetables)

अथ शाकवगः
शाकं पाठाशठ सष
             ू ासु नष णसतीनजम ्
  दोष नं लघु    ा ह सराज ववा तुकम ्
सु नष णो अि नकृ व ृ य तेषु राज वः परम ्
    यश वकार नः वच भे द तु वा तुकम ्

Patha (Cissampelos pareira), shati (Hedychium spicatum), susha, sunishanna, satinaja in general,
mitigates all the three doshas, are easily digestible and grahi (absorbent); Sunishanna increases
hunger and is aphrodisiac;
Rajakshava is still better and cures duodenal diseases, haemorrhoids; vastuka breaks up the hard
faceces. 72-73

हि त दोष यं कु ठ व ृ या सो णा रसायनी
काकमाची सरा      वया चा गेय ला अि नद पनी
    यश अ नल ले म हतो णा           ा हणी लघुः

Kakamachi (Solanum nigrum) mitigates the three doshas, useful in skin diseases, is aphrodisiac,
hot in potency, rejuvenator, causes easy movement of faeces, and is good for voice.
Changeri (Oxalis corniculata) is sour taste, kindles digestion, good for duodenal diseases,
haemorrhoids and for increased vata and kapha; hot in potency, withholds elimination of fluids
and is easily digestible. 74

पटोलस तला र टशा गे टाव गुजा अम ृताः
वे ा ब ृहतीवासाकु तल तलप णकाः
म डूकपण कक टकारवे लकपपटाः
नाडीकलायगोिज वावाताकं वन त तकम ्
कर रं कु कं न द कुचैला शुकलादनी
क ट लं के बुकं शीतं सकोशातकककशम ्
त तं पाके कटु     ा ह वातलं कफ प तिजत ्

Patola, saptala, arista (neem leaves), sharngeshta (angaravalli/bharangi), Avalguja (Bakuchi),
amruta (Tinospora), Vetra (shoot of vetra), Brhati (Solanum indicum), vasa (Adhatoda vasica),
 kutill, tilaparnika (badraka), mandukaparni (Gotu kola), Karkota, karavella (bitter gourd).
Parpata, nadikalaya, gojihwa (godhumi); vartaka (brhati), vanatiktaka (vatsaka/kutaja), karira,
kulaka (kupila), nandi (jaya),kucaila, sakuladani (mesasrngi), katilla (raktapunarnava), kebuka
(kembuka),kosataka, and karkasa (kampilla) all these are cold in potency, bitter in taste, pungent
at the end of digestion, with hold the movement of fluids, increase vatta and mitigate kapha and
pitta. 75-78

  यं पटोलं कृ मनुत ् सवाद ुपाकं    च दम ् ।


         Page No. 85                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Patola is good for the heart (or the mind), useful in worms, sweet at the end of digestion and
gives taste.

प तलं द पनं भे द वात नं ब ृहती वयम ्

The two Brihatis (Brihati and Kantakari) increases pitta, promote hunger, breaks the hard faeces.

व ृषं तु व मकास नं र त प तहरं परम ्

Vrusha (Vasa) cures vomiting, cough and especially so the haemorragic disease.

कारवे लं सकटुकं द पनं कफिज परम ्

Karavella (bitter gourd) is bitter in taste, kindles digestion and mitigates kapha and pitta
especially.


Brinjal benefits:

वाताकं कटु त तो णं मधुरं कफवातिजत ् ।
स ारं अि नजननं          यं    यं अ प तलम ् ॥८१॥

Brinjal is pungent, bitter, hot in potency, sweet, mitigates kapha and vata, is slightly alkaline,
kindles digestion improves taste and does not aggravate pitta 81

कर रमा मानकरं कषायं          वाद ु त तकम ्

Karira produces distention of the abdomen, is astringent, sweet and bitter in taste,

कोशाताकाव गज
           ु कौभे दनावि नद पनौ

Kosataki and avalguja break the hard faeces and kindle digestion. 82

त डुल यो हमो        ः    वादप
                            ु ाकरसो लघःु
मद प त वषा       नः मु जातं वात प तिजत ्
ि न धं शीतं गु      वाद ु बं ृहणं शु कृ परं

Tanduliya is cold in potency, dry, sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion and easily
digestible, cures intoxication, pitta, poison and discovers of bold;
Munjata mitigates vata and pitta, is unctuous, cold in potency, hard to digest, sweet, makes the
body stout and increases semen. 83

गुव सारा त ु पाल     या मद नी चा युपोदका
पाल    याव   मत
              ृ च चुः स तु स          हणा मकः


          Page No. 86                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Palankya is hard to digest, and laxative.

Upodika (spinach) relieves intoxication; chanchu is similar to palankya and withholds
elimination of fluids. 84

वदार वात प त नी मू ला           वाद ुशीतला
जीवनी बं ृहणी क        या गुव व ृ या रसायनम ्
च ु या सवदोष नी जीव ती मधुरा हमा

Vidari mitigates vata and pitta, is diuretic, sweet in taste, and cold in potency, prolongs life (by
giving strength), makes the body stout, good for the throat, hard to digest, aphrodisiac and
rejuvenator.

Jivanti is good for the eyes, mitigates all the dosas, is sweet in taste and cold in potency. 85-86

कू मा डत ु बका ल गककाववा ति डशम ्
तथा     पस
         ु चीनाक चभटं कफवातकृत ्
भे द व ट        य भ यि द     वाद ुपाकरसं गु

Kusmanda (ash gourd), Tumba (alabu), Kalinga, karkaru, evaru, tindisa, trapusa, cinaka,
cirbhata—all cause increase of kapha and vata, breaks the hard faeces, stays long without
digestion inside the stomach, causes more secretion in the tissues, sweet in taste and at the end of
digestion and not easily digestible. 87


Ash Gourd Benefits

व ल फलानां       वरं कू मा डं वात प तिजत ् ॥८८॥
बि तशु    करं व ृ यं    पुसं व तमू लम ् ।

Ash gourd is best among the creepers, mitigates vata and pitta cleanses the urinary bladder, and
aphrodisiac. Trapusa causes more urination (diuretic).

तु बं     तरं    ा ह का ल गैवा चभटम ्
बालं प तहरं शीतं व या प वमतो अ यथा
शीणव ृ तं तु स ारं प तलं कफवातिजत ्
रोचनं द पनं       यम ठ ला आनाहनु लघु

Tumba (alabu) is very dry (causes dryness), absorbent;
kalinga, ervaru and cirbhita when tender mitigate pitta and are cold in potency, but when ripe are
opposite in qualities, these which are overripe and separated from its attachment, will be alkaline
in taste, increase pitta, mitigate kapha, and vata, improves taste and appetite, good for the heart,
cures enlargement of the prostate, distention of abdomen and easily digestible. 89-90


          Page No. 87                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
म ृणाल बसशालूककुमुदो पलक द ुकम ्
न द माषककेलट
           ू श ृ गाटककसे कम ्
 ौ जादनं कलो यं च          ं   ा ह हमं गु

Mrinala (lotus stalk), bias (lotus root), saluki (lotus tuber), kumuda (utpala kanda), nandi,
mashaka, keluta, srngataka, kaseruka, kranucadana and kalodya are dry (cause dryness). Water
absorbent, cold in potency and hot easily digestible. 91-92

कल बना लकामाषकु ट जरकुतु बकम ्
च ल ल वाकलोणीकाकु टकवेधक
                       ु म्
जीव तझ ु    वे डकजयवशाकसुवचलाः
आलक
  ु ा न च सवा ण तथा सू या न ल णम ्
 वाद ु     ं सलवणं वात ले मकरं ग ु
शीतलम ् स ृ ट व मू ं   ायो व ट य जीय त
ि व नं न पी डतरसं        नेहा यं ना तदोषलम ्

Kalamba, Nalika – (kapotacarana), marsa, kutinjara, kutumbaka, cilli (vastuka), latvaka, lonika,
karutaka, gavedhuka, jivanta, jhun jhu, edagaja, yavasaka (yavanisaka), suvarchala and aluka of
different kinds, leaves of legumes used for soup and of laksmana are all sweet, slightly dry, salty,
increases vata and kapha, not easily digestible cold in potency, help elimination of urine and
faeces, stay long in the stomach for digestion; if cooked in steam, juice taken out and mixed with
oils, they will not cause much aggravation of the dosas 93-95

लघु प ा तु या च ल सा वा तक
                         ु समा मता

Cilli, which has small leaves is similar (in property) with vastuka. 96

तकार व णं     वाद ु स त तं कफवातिजत ्
वषा वौ कालशाकं च       स ारं कटु त तकम ्
द पनं भेदनं हि त गरशोफकफा नलान ्

Tarkari and varuna are sweet and slightly better and mitigate kapha and vata. The two kinds of
varsabhu and kalasaka are slightly alkaline, pungent and bitter, improve digestion, break the hard
faeces and cure artificial poisoning, dropsy, kapha and vata. 97

द पनाः कफवात नाि च र व वा कुराः सराः
शतावय कुरि त ता व ृ या दोष यापहाः

The tender sprouts of cirabilva increase appetite, mitigate kapha and vata and cause movement of
bowels; sprouts of satavari are bitter, aphrodisiac and mitigate the three dosas 98.

   ो वंशकर र तु वदाह वात प तलः


           Page No. 88                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Vamsakarira (tender shoots of bamboo) causes dryness inside, heartburn and increase of vata
and pitta. 99

प तूरो द पनि त तः ल हाशः कफवातिजत ्

Pattura kindles digestion, is bitter, cures enlargement of spleen, haemorrhoids and mitigates
kapha and vata. 99 ½

कृ मकासकफो        लेदान ् कासमद जये सरः

Kasamarda cures disease caused by worms, cough and increase of kapha and moves the bowels.

     ो णम लं कौसु भं गु     प तकरं सरम ्

Kousumbha is dry, hot in potency, sour, hard to digest increase pitta and makes the bowels to
move.

गु   णं साषपं ब    व मू ं सवदोषकृत ्

Sarsapa (mustard) is not easily digestible, hot in potency, binds the faeces and urine and causes
increase of all the dosas.
Mulaka (radish), when tender and not having definite taste, is slightly alkaline and better,
mitigates the dosas, easily digestible hot in potency, and cures abdominal tumours, cough,
asthma, ulcers, disease of he eye and throat, horseness of voice, asthma, upward movement inside
the abdomen (reverse peristalsis) and chronic nasal catarrh. 102-103.


Radish benefits:

य बालं अ य तरसं कि जत ्          ारं स त तकम ्
त मूलकं दोषहरं लघु सो णं नय छ त
गु मकास य वास णने गलामयान ्
 वराि नसादोदावतपीनसां च
मह पुनः
रसे पाके च कटुकमु णवीय        दोषकृत ्
गुव भ यि द च ि न ध स ं तद प वातिजत ्
वात ले महरं शु कं सवम ् आमं तु दोषलम ्

Radish that is tender, and not having definite tatste, is slightly alkaline and bitter, balances
Doshas, easy to digest, hot in potency and cures abdominal tumors, cough, respiratory conditions,
ulcers, diseases of eye and throat, hoarseness of voice, bloating, and rhinitis. Radish, big in size
is hard to digest, pungent in taste and at the end of digestion, not in potency, increases all the
three doshas, hard to digest and is abhishynadi (indigestion plus sticky to the gut).
When cooked with fats it mitigates vata; the dried one causes increase of the dosha. 104.

          Page No. 89                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
कटू णो वातकफहा प डालुः प तवधनः

Pindalu is pungent, hot in potency, mitigates vata and kapha but increase pitta. 105

कुठे र श ुसुरससुमुखासु रभू त ृणम ्
फ णजा जकज भीर भ ृ त           ा ह शालनम ्
वदा ह कटु       ो णं   दयं द पनरोचनम ्
 कशु कृ म ु ती णं दोषो       लेशकरं लघु

Kuthera, sigru (drum stick), surasa, sumuka, asuri, bhutrna, phanijjia, arjaka, jambira, etc. when
green are water absorbent, cause burning sensation during digestion, pungent, cause dryness, hot
in potency, good for the heart (or the mind), kindles hunger and taste, destroy vision, semen and
worms (intestinal parasites), penetrates deep, cause slight increase of the dosas and are
easily digestible 106-107.


Holy basil benefits

ह मा कास वष वास पा व क् पू तग धहा ।
सुरस: सुमुखो ना त वदाह गरशोफहा ॥१०८॥

Surasa (Tulasi – Holy Basil) cures hiccup, cough, poison, asthma, pain in the flanks and bad
breath.
Sumukha does not cause much burning sensation, cures artifial (homicidal) poison and dropsy.
107

आ का त तमधुरा मू ला न च प तकृत ्

Ardrika (coriander) is bitter and sweet in taste, diuretic and does not increase pitta.


Garlic benefits:

लशुनो भ ृशती णो णः कटुपाकरसः सरः १०९
  यः के यो गु व ृ यः ि न धो रोचनद पनः
भ नास धानकृ ब यो र त प त द ूषणः ११०
कलासकु ठगु माश मे ह        मकफा नलान ्
स ह मापीनस वासकासान ् हि त रसायनम ् १११

Lashuna (garlic) is highly penetrating (deep into the tissues), hot in potency, pungent in taste,
and at the end of digestion, makes the bowles to move, good for the heart (or the mind), and
hairs; hard to digest, aphrodisiac, unctuous, improves taste and digestion, helps union of features,
gives strength, greatly vitiates the blood and pitta, cures leucoderma, skin diseases, abdominal


          Page No. 90                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
tumours, heamorrhoids, diabetes, worms, diseases caused by kapha and vata, hiccup, chronic
nasal catarrh , asthma and cough. It is a rejuvenator of the body.109-111

पला डु ता गुण यूनः      ले मलो ना त प तलः

Palandu (onion) is inferior in the above qualities, increases of pitta. 111 ½

कफवाताशसां प यः       वे दे अ यवहतौ तथा
ती णो गु जनको       ा ह पि तनां हतकृ न सः

Grinjanaka (carrot) is best suitable to persons suffering from haemorrhoids of kapha Vata
origin, for fomenting (the pile masses) and eating; it is penetrating, water absorbent and not
suitable to those who have pitta predominance. 112

द पनः सरू णो    चयः कफ नो वशदो लघःु वशेषादशसां प यः भूक द                 व तदोषलः

Surana (Yam) kindles digestion, improves taste, mitigates kapha is non-unctous, easily
digestible and especially good for haemorrhoids; bhukanda causes increase of all the dosas to a
great extent .113

प े पु पे फले नाले क दे च ग ु ता       मात ्
बस शाकेषु जीव ती साषपं ववरं परम ्
इ त शाकवगः

Leaves, flowers, fruits (unripe), tubular leaves and tubers are heavy (not easily digestible in their
successive order; jivanti is the best and sarshapa (mustard) is the worst among the leafy
vegetables. 114.

Thus ends the group of vegetables.

Notes:- different kinds of vegetables have been described in these verses, some of them are
recognizable now while some others are not, some of them were in use in olden days but not so
now-a-days, many are available only in forests and fields while some others are cultivated.


          Page No. 91                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Phala vrga- (group of fruits):-


Grapes benefits:

अथ फलवगः
    ा ा फलो तमा व ृ या च ु या स ृ टमू व      ११५
    वाद ुपाकरसा ि न धा सकषाया हमा गु ः
नह य नल प ता          त ता य वमदा ययान ् ११६
त ृ णकास म वास वरभे द त यान ्

Draksa (grapes) is best among fruits, is aphrodisiac, good for the eyes, helps elimination of urine
and faeces, sweet in taste and the end of digestion, unctous, slightly astringent, cold potency, hard
to digest, cures diseases of vata, pitta and rakta; better taste in the mouth, intoxication, thirst,
cough, fever, respiratory conditions, hoarseness, injury to the lungs and chronic respiratory
diseases. 115-116 ½


Dadima – (Pomegranate)

उ      त प ता जय त       ी दोषान ् वाद ु दा डमम ् ११७
प ता वरो ध ना यु णम लं वातकफापहम ्
सव      दयं लघु ि न धं     ा ह रोचन द पनम ् ११८

It mitigates the greatly increased pitta in particular and the other doss also and is sweet; the sour
variety is also not going to increase pitta, not very hot in potency and mitigates vata and kapha.
All varieties of Pomegranate are good to the hear, easily digestible unctuous, without elimination
of fluids, stimulate appetite and digestion. 117-118

मोचखजूरपनसना रकेलप षकम ्
आ ाततालका मयराजादनमधूकजम ्
सौवीरबदरा कोलफ गु ले मातको वम ्
वातामा भशुका ोडमक
                ु ू लक नकोचकम ्
उ माणं      यालं च बं ृहणं गु   शीतलम ्
दाह त यहरं र त प त सादनम ्
 वाद ुपाकरसं ि न धं व टि भ कफशु कृत ्

Mocha (plantain), kharjura (dates) panasa (jack fruits) narikela (cocoanut ) parusaka amrataka ,
tala, kasmarya, rajadana, madhuka, badara, ankola, phalgu, slesmataka, vatama, abhisuka,
aksoda, mukulaka, nikocaka, urumanam, and priyala make the body stout, not easily digestible
cold in potency, relive burning sensation , injury to the lungs, consumption, bleeding conditions,
sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion, unctous, stay long in the stomach without
digestion, increase kapha and semen. 119-121 ½

           Page No. 92                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
फलं तु प तलं तालं सरं का मयजं हमम ्
शकृ मू वब ध नं के यं मे यं रसायनम ्

Fruit of Tala – Borassus flabellifera increases pitta, moves the bowels. Fruits of kasmarya is
cold in potency, relives the obstruction of faeces and urine, good for the hairs, increases
intelligence and is a rejuvenator. 122

वातामा यु णवीय त ु कफ प तकरं सरम ्

Vaataama etc. are hot in potency increase kapha and pitta, are axative. 123.

परम ् वातहरं ि न धमनु णं तु        यालजम ्
    यालम जा मधुरो व ृ यः प ता नलापहः

Priyala (Buchanania lanzan) mitigates vata effectively, is unctous, cold in potency; its marrow is
sweet, aphrodisiac, mitigates pitta and vata,

कोलम जा ग ुणै त व त ृ छ दः कासिज च सः

Kola majja (fleshy part of the kola) is similar (in properties with priyala majja ) relieves thirst,
vomiting and cough. 124.

प वं सद
      ु ज
        ु रं व वं दोषलं पू तमा तम ्
द पनं कफवात नं बालं, ा युमयं च तत ्

Bilva phala (bael fruit) when ripe is hard to digest, aggravates the doshas and causes flatus;
unripe fruit kindles digestion, mitigates vata and kapha; both are water absorbant. 125

क प थमामं क ठ नं दोषलं , दोषघा त तु
प वं हधमावमथुिजत ्, सव ा ह वषापहम ्

Amakapittha (unripe Kapittha) is bad to the throat, and increases the three doshas. Ripe fruit
mitigates the dosas, relives hiccup ad vomiting, both are water absorbent and antipoisonus .126

जा भवं गु     व टि भ शीतलं भ ृशवातलम ्
स     ा ह मू शकृ तोरक     यं कफ प तिजत ्

Jambava (Jamun fruit) is not easily digestible, stays long inside the stomach, cold in potency,
causes aggravation of vata especially, absorbs moisture from urine and faeces, bad for throat and
mitigates kapha and pitta 127

वात प ता कृ बालं , ब ाि थकफ प तकृत ्
गुवा ं वातिज प वं       वा व लं कफशु कृत ्


          Page No. 93                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                         Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Bala amra (tender unripe mango) increases Vata, Rakta (blood) and pitta; when its seed is fully
formed, it increases Kapha and Pitta; when it is ripe it is not easily digestible, mitigates vata,
increases kapha and semen. 128

व ृ ा लं   ाह      ो णं वात ले महरं लघु

Vrksamla (Garcinia fruits) is absorbent, dry, hot in potency, mitigates vata and kapha and
easily digestible 129.

श या गु     णं केश नं       ं

Samya (fruit of sami) is not easily digestible, hot in potency, destroys the hairs and causes
dryness.

पीलु त ु प तलम ्
कफवातहरं भे द ल हाशः कृ मग ु मनुत ्
स त तं     वाद ु य पीलु ना यु णं त दोषिजत ्

Pilu increases pitta, mitigates kapha and vata, is purgative, cures diseases of the spleen,
haemorrhoids, worms, abdominal tumors; that variety of pilu which has bitter- sweet taste is not
very hot in potency and mitigates all three dosas 130

 वि त तकटुका ि न धा मातुलु ग य वातिजत ्
बं ृहणं मधुरं मांसं वात प तहरं गु
लघु त केसरं कास वास ह मामदा ययान ्
आ यशोषा नल ले म वब ध छ यरोचकान ्
गु मोदराशः शूला न म दाि न वं च नाशयेत ्

The skin of matulunga (bigger variety of lemon) fruit is better, pungent and unctous, mitigates
vata; its fleshy part makes the body stout, is sweet in taste, mitigates vata and pitta and not
easily digestible its tendril is easily digestible cures cough, asthma, hiccup, alchoholic
intoxication dryness of the mouth, disorders of vata and kapha, constipation, vomiting, loss of
taste, abdominal tumor, enlargement of the abdomen, haemorrhoids, colic and dyspepsia 131-133

भ लातक य तव मांसंबं ृहणं           वाद ु शीतलम ्
तद    यि नसमं मे यं कफवातहरं परम ्

Bhallataka (marking nut) The outer rind and fleshy part of bhallataka fruit makes the body
stout, sweet in taste, cold in potency; its seed is just like fire in properties, increases intelligence
and effectively mitigates kapha and vata. 134

 वा व ल शीतमु णं च              वधा पालेवतं गु
   यम यि न शमनम ्


           Page No. 94                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Palevata fruit of sweet taste is cold in potency, while that of sour taste is hot, both are hard to
digest, improve taste and cure diseases due to excess digestive activity. 134 ½

     यं मधुरमा कम ्
प वमाशु जरां या त ना यु णगु दोषलम ्

Aruka fruit improve taste and is sweet; ripe under goes digestion quickly, not very hot in potency,
sometimes hard to digest and increases the dosas 135.

 ा ाप षकं चा म लं प तकफ दम ्
गु    णवीय वात नं सरं सकरमदकम ्

Draksa (grapes) and parusaka and karamardaka, in their green state are sour, increase pitta and
kapha, hard to digest, hot in potency, mitigate vata and laxative. 136

तथा अ लं कोलकक धुलकुचा ातका कम ्
ऐरावतं द तशढं सतूदं म ृग लि डकम ्
ना त प तकरं प वं शु कं च करमदकम ्

Kola, karkandhu, lakuca, amrataka, aruka, airavata, dantasatha, satuda, mrigalindika- all are sour
and do not aggravate pitta greatly; so also, karamardaka fruit ripended and dried does not cause
great increase of pitta 9causes mild increase). 137- 138

द पनं भेदनं शु कम ल काकोलयोः फलम ्
त ृ णा म लम छे द लि व टं कफवातयोः

Fruits of amlika and kola improve digestion, cause purgation, cures thirst, fatigue, exhaustion; are
easily digestible and mitigates kapha and vata. 139

फलानामवरं त      लकुचं सवदोषकृत ्

इ त फलवगः


Lakuca phala is least among all the fruits and increases all the above the dosas. Thus ends the
group of fruits.


           Page No. 95                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Varjya (qualities of food articles that are worth rejecting):-

हमानलो णद ुवाता याललाला दद ू षतम ्
ज तज
   ु ु टं जले म नमभू मजमनातवम ्
अ यधा ययुतं ह नवीय जीणतया अ त च
धा यं ये जे तथा शाकं          स मकोमलम ्
अस जातरसं त व छु कं चा य               मूलकात ्
 ायेण फलम येवं तथा आमं ब वविजतम ्

Grains which have been spoiled by forest, heavy breeze, hot sunlight, polluted air , and saliva of
snake and other reptiles; which are infested with worms, which have remained under water for
long time, not grown in the field meant for it (in fields meant for other kinds of grain) , which are
unseasonal, mixed with other grains, and which have lost their properties having become very
old- should be rejected.

Similarly also with the vegetables, the dishes prepared from them without addition of material
9oil or ghree), which are very hard even after cooking, should be avoided.
Tender vegetables which have not developed their normal taste and which have become dry
should not be used except amabilwa (unripe bael fruit)


Ausadha varga (group of medicinal subsances/herbs)

Salts:

अथौषध वगः
व यि द लवणं सव सू मं              ु टमलं म ृद ु १४३
वात नं पाक ती णो णं रोचनं कफ प तकृत ्

All types of salts are vishyandi (produce more secretions in the tissues) suksma (enter into minute
pores) help soft/easy movement of faeces, mitigate vata, help digestion, are penetrating ,
aggravate kapha and pitta. 143

Among them,

सैधवं त    स वाद ु व ृ यं   दयं      दोषनुत ् १४४
ल वनु णं    शः प यम वदा यि नद पनम ्

saindhava salt (rock salt) is slightly sweet, aphrodisiac, good for the heart (or mind), mitigates
all the three doshas, easily digestible not hot in potency, good for health, does not cause burning
digestion and kindles digestion 144


           Page No. 96                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
लघु सौवचलं       दयं सुग    यु गारशोधनम ् १४५
कटुपाकं वब ध नं द पनीयं         च दम ्

Sauvarcala(sochal salt) is easily digestible good for the heart (or mind) , possesses good smell,
purifies belching, pungent at the end of digestion , relives constipation, kindles digestion and
gives taste. 145

ऊ वाधः कफवातानुलोमनं द पनं बडम ् १४६
वब धानाह व ट भशूल गौरवनाशनम ्

Bida salt produces both upward and downward movement of kapha and vata, kindles digestion,
cures constipation, flatulence, obstruction, of flatus, colic and heaviness (of the abdomen). 146

वपाके     वाद ु सामु ं गु    ले म ववधनम ्

Samudra (common salt) is sweet at the end of digestion, not easily digestible and aggravates
kapha.147.

स त तकटुक ारं ती णमु के द चौ         दम ्

Aubdhida is slightly bitter, pungent and alkaline in taste, penetrates deep and increases the
secretions.

कृ णे सौवचलगुणा लवणे ग धविजताः

Krisna lavana (black salt) has properties similar to souvarcala except the smell. 148

रोमकं लघु

Romaka is easily digestible;

पांसू थं स ारं   ले मलं गु

Pamsuttha is slightly alkaline, aggravates kapha and not easilt digestible.

लवणानां     योगे तु सै धवा द    योजयेत ्

Whenever lavanas (salt) are to be used (for medicinal recipes) they should be prepared
commencing with saindhava.

गु म    हणीपा डु ल हानाहगलामयान ्
 वासाशः कफकासां च शमये यवशक
                          ू जाः


          Page No. 97                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Yavakshara - (Kshara prepared from barley) mitigates abdominal tumors, diseases of the heart,
duodenal disease, anaemia, splenic disorders, distension of the abdomen, diseases of the throat,
asthma, haemorrhoids and cough arising from kapha. 150

Kshara -

  ार: सव च परमं ती णो ण: कृ मिज लघु: ।
प तास ृग ् द ूषण: पाक छे य       यो वदारण: ॥१५१॥
अप य: कटुलाव यात ् शु ौज: केशच ुषाम ् ।

All ksharas are very
Teekshna – penetrating ;
ushna – very hot in potency,
krumijit – destroy worms
Laghu – easily digestible
Pitta Asruk dushana – vitiate pitta and blood
Paki – helps in digestion, causes healing of wounds
Chedya - help break up hard masses,
ahrudya not good for the heart, punctures the tissues;
being pungent and salty in taste are not good to semen, ojas (essence of the tissues ), hairs and
eye (vision) 151

ह गु वातकफानाह शूल नं प त कोपनम ्॥१५२॥
कटुपाकरसं      यं द पनं पाचनं लघु ।

Hingu (asa foetida) mitigates vata, kapha, cues distension of the abdomen and colic, aggravates
pitta, pungent in taste and at the end of digestion, enhances taste, hunger, digestion and is easily
digestible. 152.


Haritaki -

कषाया मधुरा पाके          ा वलवणा लघुः १५३
द पनी पाचनी मे या वयसः         थापनी परम ्

उ णवीया सरा आयु या बु ीि        यबल दा       १५४
कु ठवैव यवै वयपुराण वषम वरान ्

शरो अ      पा डु   ोगकामला हणीगदान ् १५५
सशोषशोफातीसारमेदमोहव म         मीन ्
 वासकास से काशः ल हानाहगरोदरम ् १५६
वब धं      ोतसां गु ममू    त भमरोचकम ्
हर तक जये त ् या धं तां तां च कफवातजान ् १५७


           Page No. 98                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Haritaki is astringent, sweet at the end of digestion, dry (causes dryness) devoid of lavana
(possesses the remaining five tastes) easily digestable, kindles hunger, helps digestion, improves
intelligence, best to maintain youth , hot in potency, laxative, bestows long life, strengthens the
mind and the sense organs, cures leprosy (and other skin diseases) discolouration, disorders of
voice, chronic intermittent fevers, diseases of the head, and eyes, anaemia, heart disease,
jaundice, disease of the duodenum, consumption, dropsy, diarrhoea, obesity, fainting, vomiting,
worms (intestinal parasites), dyspnoea, cough, excess salivation, haemorrhoids, disease of the
spleen, distention of the abdomen, enlargement of the abdomen, obstruction of channels,
abdominal tumors, stiffness of the thing, loss of taste (anorexia0 and many other disease arising
from (aggravation of ) kapha and vata. 153-157.

त वदामलकं शीतम लं प तकफापहम ्

Similarly so is amalaka in all other properties it is cold I potency, and mitigates pitta and kapha.

कटु पाके हमं के यम मीष च त गुणम ्

Aksha (vibhitaka) is pungent at the end of digestion, cold in potency, good for hairs and
possesses properties similar (to haritaki and amalaka) but slightly less (in degree). 158


Triphala benefits:

इयं रसायनवरा      फला अ यामयापहा ।
रोपणी व गद       लेदमेदोमे हकफा िजत ् ॥१५९॥

Thus, the Triphala (haritaki, amalaki and vibhitaki), together is a best rejuvenator of the body,
cures diseases of the eyes, heals wounds and cures skin diseases, excess moisture of the tissues,
obesity, diabetes, aggravation of kapha and Asra (blood) 159.


Trijata and Chaturjata

सकेसरं चतुजातं व प ैलं        जतकम ् ।
प त को प ती णो णं           ं रोचनद पनम ् ॥१६०॥

Twak – (Cinnamon), patra (Cinnamon leaf) and Ela – (Cardamom) together are known as
Trijataka and these along with kesara from the chaturjata.

They cause aggravation of pitta, are penetrating, hot in potency, cause dryness, improve taste and
hunger. 160


          Page No. 99                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Maricha (pepper)

रए पाके च कटुकं कफ नं म रचं लघु ।

Black pepper is pungent both in taste and at the end of digestion, mitigates kapha and is easily
digestable.


Pippali (long pepper)

 ले मला     वीदश
               ु ीत आ ा गव
                         ु ि न         ना च प पल १६१
सा शु का वपर ता अतः ि न धा व ृ या रसे कटुः
 वाद ुपाका अ नल ले म वासकासापहा सरा १६२
न ताम युपयु जीत रसायन व धं वना

Long pepper, in its green state aggravates kapha, is sweet in taste and cold in potency, not easily
digestible and is unctous.

The same, when dry, becomes opposite - aphrodisiac, pungent in taste, sweet at the end of
digestion, mitigates Vata and Kapha, usefin in asthma, cough; is laxative.
Long pepper should not be used in excess, for long period, without following the regimen of
rejuvenation therapy. 161-162

Ginger benefits:

नागरं द पनं व ृ यं    ाह     यं वब धनत
                                     ु ् 163
  यं लघु    वाद ुपाकं ि न धो णं कफवातिजत ्

Nagara – (ginger), increases hunger, is aphrodisiac, water absorbent, good for the heart (or the
mind), relives constipation, bestows, taste, easily digestible, sweet at the end of digestion,
unctuous, hot in potency and mitigates kapha and vata. 163

त वदा कमेत च         यं    कटुकं जयेत ् १६४
 थौ याि नसदन वासकास ल पदपीनसान ्

Similar is ardraka (fresh ginger, green);
Trikatu - Pepper, long pepper and ginger – together known as trikatu, useful in obesity,Asthma,
dyspepsia, cough, filariasis and chronic nasal catarrh. 164

च वका प पल मूलं म रचा पा तरं गुणैः

Chavaika (Piper chaba) and pippalimula (long pepper root) possess qualities and properties
similar to Marica (black pepper) but in lesser degree. 165.

च को अि न समः पाके शोफाशः कृ मकु ठहा


           Page No. 100                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Chitraka (leadwort) is similar to fire in digesting thing and cures dropsy, haemorrhoids, worms
and leprosy (and othe skin diseases).

प चकोलकमेत च म रचेन वना            म ृतम ्
गु म ल होदरानाहशल
                ू नं द पनं परम ्
The above, excluding marica, (pippali, pippalimula, cavya, citraka and nagara) is known
as panchakolaka, It cures abdominal tumors, disease of the sleen, enlargement of the abdomen,
distension and colic, and is best to improve hunger and digestion.

ब वका मयतकार पाटला ट टुकैमहत ्
जये कषाय त तो णं प चमूलं कफा नलौ
Bilwa, kasarya, tarari, patala and tintuka are together known as Mahat panchamula. It is
astringent and bitter in taste, not in potency and mitigate kapha and anila (vata ) 167

  वं ब ृह यंशुमती वयगो ुरकैः     म ृतम ्
 वाद ुपाकरसं ना तशीतो णं सवदोशिजत ्

Brihatidwaya (brihati and kantakari), amsumatidwaya (saliparni and prsniparni) and goksuraka-
together are known as hrasva panchamula (Laghu panchamoola). It is sweet in taste and at the
end of digestion, neither very hot nor very cold in potency and mitigates all the dosas. 168.
The above two – laghu and mahat panchamoola constitute Dashamoola

बलापन
    ु नवैर डशप
             ू पण वयेन तु
म यमं कफवात नं ना त प तकरं सरम ्

Bala, punarnava, eranda, surpaparni dvaya (masaparni and mundgaparni) together from
the madhyama pancamula. It mitigates kapha and vata, does not greatly aggravate pitta and is
laxative. 169.

Jivan Pancamula

अभी वीराजीव तीजीवकषभकैः         म ृतम ्
जीवना यं तु च ु यं व ृ यं प ता नलापहम ्
Abhiru – Asparagus racemosus, vira, jivanti, jivaka and rsabhaka together from the jivana
pancamula. It is good for the eye, aphrodnd mitigates pitta and anila (vata)

Trina Mancmula

त ृणा यं प तिज भकासे ुशरशा ल भः
इ यौषधवगः

Trnakhya (trna pancamula) consisting of darbha, kasa, iksu, sara sali, mitigates pitta. 171
Thus, were described, in brief, the substances used daily as food, in groups such as suka, simbi,
pakvanna, mamsa, saka, phala and ausadha. 182
Thus ends the chapter known as annaswarupa vijnaniya.


         Page No. 101                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan