Chapter 7 Anna Raksha Vidhi अ नर                                        वध
Protection of Food
The 7th chapter of Sutrasthana of Asthanga Hrudayam text book is called as Anna Raksha Vidhi
Adhyaya. Anna raksha refers to protection of food. This chapter deals with royal
physician, features of poisoned foods and drinks, incompatible food combinations, effects and
treatment, healthy sleep rules and celibacy.


Pranacharya (Royal physician) :-

राजा राजग ृहास ने    ाणाचाय नवेशयेत ्
सवदा स भव येवं सव          तजाग ृ वः

The king should arrange for the residence of the royal physician near to the palace so that the
physician can be vigilant about all things at all times. – 1

अ नपानं वषा       े वशेषेण मह पतेः
योग ेमौ तदाय तौ धमा या यि नब धनाः

The foods and drinks of the king should be protected from poison, because, the King’s health and
welfare depends on his food and drink and the health and welfare of the country is dependant on
the King. – 2


Features of poisoned foods and drinks -

ओदनो वषवान ् सा       ो या य व ा यता मव
चरे ण प यते प वो भवे पयु षतोपमः ३
मयरू क ठतु यो मा मोहमू छा से ककृत ्
ह यते वणग धा यैः ि ल यते चि            का चतः ४

Boiled rice mixed with poison
Sandra – becomes thick,
Even when it is boiling, the contends do not overflow from the vessel.t
Chirena Pachyate – takes a long time to cook,
Pakvo bhavati paryushitopama – after cooking it becomes moist and stale, very soon
Mayura Kantha Tulyoshma – emits steam with the colour of the peacock’s neck (blue),
Moha moorcha prasekakrut – the steams and fumes from the container causes delusion, fainting
and excessive salivation.
Heeyate varna gandhadyaihi – quickly loses its original colour, odour, taste, texture,
Klidyate chandrikachitaha – becomes watery and full of glistening particles. 3-4


          Page No. 102                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
 य जना याशु शु यि त याम वाथा न त              च
ह न अ त र ता वकृता छाया             ये त नैव वा ५
फेनो वराजी    सीम त त तु बु बुद स भवः
वि छ न वरसा रागः ख             वाः शाकमा मषम ् ६

The side-dishes dry up quick and become dirty
reflective images seen in them appear deficient, malformed, abnormal or not seen at all;
froth and lines appear on their surface and edges, threads and bubbles are likely to appear.
Raga (sweet syrups), Khandava (sweet puddings), vegetables and meat become broken (liquid
and solid portions get separated) and acquire bad taste. 5-6.

नीला राजी रसे , ता ा       ीरे , दध न   यते
शयावा, आपीता सता त े , घ ृते पानीयसि नभा
म तु न    या कपोताभा, राजी कृ णा तष
                                  ु ोदके
काल म या भसोः,         ौ े ह र तैले अ णोपमः
पाकः फलानामामानां प वानां प रकोथनम ्
  याणामा शु काणां      यातां     ला न ववणते
म ृद ूनां क ठनानां च भवे    पश वपययः
मा य य     फु टत     वं    ला नग धा तरो वः
 यामम डलता व        े, शदनं त तुप मणाम ्
धातम
   ु ौि तकका ठा मर ना दषु मला तता
 नेह पश भाहा नः, स भ वं तु म ृ मये

Neela Raji Rase – Blue lines appear in meat soup,
Tamra ksheere - coppery red lines in milk and
Shyava dadhani – black ones in curds
Peeta Sita takre – yellowish white lines in buttermilk,
Ghrute paaneeya sannibha – watery lines on ghee,
Mastuni syat kapotabha – pegion like streaks appear on Mastu – Supernatent liquid of curds
(whey),
Raji krishna tushodake – blue black lines on Tusodaka (sour drink prepared from barley husk),
Kaali madya ambhasoho – black lines on wines and water,
Harit taile arunopama – green lines in honey and crimson lines on oils.
Unripe fruits ripen (fast) and ripe ones become overripe and decomposed.
Substances which are green and dry become dull in appearance and discolored.,
Soft food substances become hard and vice versa.
The flowers of the garland become split at their edges, fade and assume unnatural smell.
Dirty patches appear on cloth (dress and other apparels), its threads and hems fall out.
Vessels prepared from metals, pearls, wood, stone, precious stones etc. become dirty, and lose
their smooth touch and luster.
Mud vessels gain smooth touch and luster. 5-11.


          Page No. 103                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Vishada Laksana (features of the person who puts poison) :-

वषदः यावशु का यो वल ो वी ते दशः १२
    वेदवेपथम
           ु ां     तो भीतः      खल त ज ृ भते

The person who is about to poison someone will have
Shyava shushka Asya – dry and discoloured ace
Vilaksho Veekshate dishaha – eccentrically looks in all directions
Sveda vepathuman – sweating and tremors
Trasta – tired,
Bheeta – frightened
Skhalati – slips while talking and walking
Jrumbhate – yawns frequently. 12


Testing of poisoned foods – Vishanna Pareeksha

    ा या नं स वषं वि नरे कावतः         फुट य त
शखीक ठाभ धूमा चरन चव ग धवान ्

Upon throwing the poisoned food on fire, it emits crackling sound, the flame emits as a single
pile, without whirls, the colour of smoke resembles to that of peacock’s neck (glistening blue),
sometimes the flame may not come up at all. It will cause emitting of very foul and strong smell.

     य ते म       काः    ा य काकः      ाम वरो भवेत ्
उ      ोशि त च          टैव त छुकदा यूहसा रकाः
हंसः       खल त, ला नज व जीव य जायते
चकोर य अ           वैरा यं ,   ौ च य    या मदोदयः
कपोतपरभ ृ         च वाका जह यसन
                              ू ्
उ वे गं या त माजारः, शकृ मु च त वानरः
     ये मयरू त          या म दतेजो भवे वषम ्
इ य नं वषव              ा वा यजेदेवं   य नतः
यथा तेन वप ये र न प न               ु ज तवः

Mriyate Makshikaaha – upon eating such food, bees die
Kaakaha kshaamasvaro bhavet – Crow voice becomes depleted
Parot, Dathyuha (gallinule bird) and Sarika (Mynah) start hooting at the poisoned food just by
seeing it.
Hamsaha praskhalati – Swan changes its gait
Glaanih: jeevenjeevasya jaayate – Chukar gets exhausted
Chakorasya akshivairaagyam – Greeh pheasant’s eyes turn red
Kraunchasya madodaya: – Pond heron becomes intoxicated
Pigeon, Parabhrit (Cuckoo) and Chaktravaaka lose their life
UdvegaM yaati maarjaara: – cat becomes irritated, excited

             Page No. 104                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shakrun munchati vanara: – monkey defecates
After confirming the poisoned food by above methods, it should be disposed away carefully- 14-
18

Diseases caused by poisoned food – (Visha annaja Vikara) –

 प ृ टे त ु क डूदाहोषा वरा त फोटसु तयः
नखारोम यु तः शोफः, सेका या वषनाशनाः
श   ा त      लेपा च से यच दनप कैः
ससोमव कताल सप कु ठाम त
                     ृ ानतैः

External effects: The touch of poisoned foods produces itching and irritation, burning sensation
all over the body, burning sensation at the site of touch, fever, pain, eruptions, loss of tactile
sensation, falling of the nails and hairs and swelling.

The treatment shall be bathing (washing), pouring with water processed with anti-poisonous
drugs, application of paste of Sevya (Ushira), Candana (sandalwood), Padmaka – Wild
Himalayan Cherry (heart wood) – Prunus puddum / cerasoides;, Somavalka, Talisa Patra –
Cinnamomum tamala, Kushta (Saussurea lappa), Amrita (Tinospora) and Nata – Valeriana
wallichi. 19-20.

लालािज वो ठयोजा यमूषा च म चमायनम ्
द तहष रसा       वं हनु त भ च व गे
से या यै त    ग डूषाः सव च वशिज          तम ्

Local effect in oral cavity: Poisoned food inside mouth causes excess of salivation, inactivity of
the tongue and lips, burning sensation, tingling of the teeth, inability to perceive taste and
stiffness of the lower jaw.

The treatment shall be mouth gargling with water processed with Sevya – Khus Khus – Vetiveria
zizanioides and other drugs mentioned earlier and all other therapies for the mouth which are
anti-poisonous. 21-21½.

आमाशयगते      वेदमू छा मानमद माः
रोमहष व मदाह च ु दयरोधनम ्
ब द ु भ चाचयो अ गानां, प वाशयगते पुनः
अनेकवण वम त मू य य तसायते
त   ा कृश वं पा डुतवमुदरं बलस       यः
तयोवा त व र त य ह र े कटभीं गड
                             ु म्
स द ुवा रत न पावबाि पकाशतप वकाः
त डुल यकमल
         ू ा न कु कुटा डमव गज
                            ु म्
नावना जनपानेषु योजये वषशा तये


          Page No. 105                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Reaching stomach it produces sweating, fainting, flatulence, toxicity, giddiness, horripilations,
vomiting, burning sensation, loss of movement of the eyes and heart, and appearance of black
dots all over the body.

Reaching of the intestines it produces vomiting of many colours, excess of urination, purgation,
drowsiness, emaciation, pallor, enlargement of the abdomen and loss of strength.
For both these conditions the patient should be administered Vamana (emesis) and Virechana
(purgation therapies), followed by Nasya (nasal medication), Anjana (collyriums) and drinking of
decoction prepared from Haridra – Turmeric Rhizome – Curcuma Longa, and Daruharidra
(Berberis aristata), Katabhi – Celastrus paniculata, Guda- jaggery, Sinduvarita, Nispava, Baspika,
Sataparvika, roots of Tanduliyaka, Kukkutanda – hen’s egg and Avalguja – Psoralea corylifolia
to relieve the effect of poison. 22-26.


Hrid Vishodhana – Gara Visha Chikitsa - Treatment to detoxify heart and to treat chronic
poisoning:

वषभु ताय द या च शु ायो वमध तथा
सू मं ता रजः काले स ौ ं         वशोधनम ् २७
शु े    द ततः शाणं हे मचूण य दापये त ्
न स जते हे मपा गे प प ेअ बुव वषम ् २८
जायते वपुलं चायुगरे अ येष व धः        म ृतः

When there is poisoning, first vomiting and purgation therapy is conducted to remove remnant
poison in the gut. Then, to cleanse and detoxify heart, Tamra bhasma is administered to the
patient. After that, Swarna bhasma is administered for a long period of time. By such Swarna
administration for long time, the body becomes as pure as Gold. The term used for this is
‘Hemapanga’.

Na Sajjate Hemapange padmapatre ambuvat visham ||

In a person who has been given Gold bhasma for a long time, the poison can not do any harm,
similar to a water drop that can not touch the leaf of the lotus. The person gains long life.
The same treatment is followed in Gara Visha (chronic poisoning) also.


Incompatible foods (Viruddha Ahara):-

व      म प च आहारं व या वषगरोपमम ्

On many occasions, consuming two food items together or a particular type of food processing
may render the food toxic. It is called as incompatible food. Even incompatible foods should be
considered similar to poison / artificial poisoning. 29.


          Page No. 106                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Examples:

अनूपमा मषं माष ौ      ीर व ढकैः
व     यते सह बसैमलक
                 ू े न गड
                        ु ेन वा
वशेषा पयसा म     या म    ये व प चल चमः

Anupa mamsa with Masha, Kshaudra, Ksheera and Virudaka – Meat of animals of marshy
regions is incompatible with black gram, honey, milk and germinated grains.
Bisa, Mulaka (Radish – Raphanus sativus) or Guda jaggery is incompatible with fish.
Fish with milk, especially Chilichima variety of fist with milk is incompatible. 30.

व    म लं पयसा सह सव फलं तथा
त व कुल थवरकक गुव लमकु टकाः

All sour substances are incompatible with milk.
Sour fruits with milk is not recommended.
Horse gram (Kulattha), Varaka, Kangu, Valla and Makustaka. - these are not recommended
along with cow milk. 31½.
After consuming green leafy vegetables and radish, drinking milk should be avoided. 32.

वाराहं वा वधा ना या     ना प ष
                             ृ तकु कुटौ
आममांसा न प तेन , माषसूपेन मूलकम ्
अ वं कुसु भशाकेन, बसैः सह व ढकम ्
माषसूपगुड ीरद या यैल ाकुचं फलम ्
फलं कद या त े ण द ना तालफलेन वा
कणोषणा यां मधुना काकमाचीं गुडेन वा
स ां वा म    यपचने पचने नागर य वा
स ाम य      वा पा े कामा तमु षतां नशाम ्

Pork should not be taken along with porcupine meet.
(Kukkuta) Chicken and Spotted deer should not be taken along with curds
Uncooked meat along with bile
radish along with black gram
Sheep meat along with leaves of Kusumba herb
Germinated grains along with Bisa
Lakucha Phala along with black gram soup (masha supa)
Banana along with butter milk is not recommended
Curds along with Tala phala (Palm date)
Pippali, Maricha and honey
Kakamachi along with jaggery
Black pepper along with fish or during digestion of fish - 33-36.

म   य न तेलन नेहे सा धताः प पल          यजेत ्
कां ये दशाहमु षतं स प    णं व     करे
         Page No. 107                                           Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pippali (long pepper) processed with the oil in which fish is fried should be rejected.
Ghee kept in bronze vessel for more than 10 days should not be taken.
Hot substances or hot procedures (like sun bath) is not recommended along with Bhallataka. 37.

भासो व     यते शू यः कि प ल त सा धतः

Meat of Bhasa bird – white headed vulture should not be roasted.
Kampilla (a dish) prepared with buttermilk – 37½.

एक यं पायससुराकृशराः प रवजये त ्

Mixing of milk, beer and Krishara (rice – green gram dish) - 38

मधुस पवसातैलपा नया न        वशाि    शः
एक    वा समांशा न व      य ते पर परम ् ३९

Mixing of equal quantities of any 2, 3 or all of the following is not recommended – honey, ghee,
meat fat, sesame oil and beverages.

भ नांशे अ प म या ये द यवायनुपानतः
मधप
  ु ु करबीजं च, मधम
                  ु ैरेयशाकरम ्
म थानुपानः    ैरेय ो, हा र ः कटुतैलवान ्

Honey along with ghee, even in unequal proportions, should not be consumed along with water.
Honey along with seeds of Pushkara,
Honey, along with wine of dates (Maireya) and sugar
Milk drinks along with Mantha (solution of corn flour)
Turmeric with mustard oil is incompatible.

उपोदक अ तसाराय तलक केन सा धता

Upodika (Indian spinach) processed along with sesame seed paste causes diarrhoea. - 41

बलाका वा णीयु ता कुलमाषै च व          यते
भ ृ टा वराहवसया सैव स यो नह यसून ्

Meat of Balaka bird along with Varuni (date wine) and Kulmasha (green gram and other pulses
cooked together)
Meat of Balaka along with pork fat is lethal.

त वि ति तरप ा यगोधालवक प जलाः
एर डेनाि नना स ा त तैलेन वमूि छताः


         Page No. 108                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Meat of Tittiri, peacock, Godha (Iguana lziard), Lava (common quail), Kapinjala, cooked by the
fire of wood ofcastor and processed with, fried in castor oil is lethal.

हार तमांसं हा र शूल क ोतपा चतम ्
ह र ावि नना स यो यापादय त जी वतम ्

Meat of Haridra (yellow bird) piered with wood of Haridra and cooked with the flame of Haridra
is lethal.

भ मपांशुप र व तं तदे व च समा        कम ्

Meat of Haridra, cooked by smearing ash and sand, consumed along with honey kills the person
quickly.


Definition of Viruddha – incompatible -

यत ् कि चत ् दोषं उ     ले य न हरे त ् तत ् समासत: । ४५ ।
व     म् ।

In brief, whichever food or activity that causes increase of Doshas but does not expel the Dosha
out of the body is termed as Viruddha.

Note: In Panchakarma treatment also, Dosha is increased and then expelled out of body. But in
Panchakarma, though there is increase of Dosha, because they are expelled out, there is no harm.
But in Viruddha Ahara, the food causes only increase of Dosha, leading to toxic symptoms.


The treatment for incompatible food consumption is

शु र े टा शमो वा त वरो ध भः

Shodhana – purification procedure – Panchakarma
Shamana – palliative treatment


Virodha chikitsa – symptom based treatment.

    यै तैरेव वा पूव शर र या भसं कृ तः

Health should be restored quickly by using food that have opposite qualities to that of
incompatible foods.

 यायामि न धद ताि नवयः          थबलशा लनाम ्
वरो य प न पीडायै सा         यम पं च भोजनम ् ४७


             Page No. 109                                           Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
In those who exercise regularly, who are habituated to oily fatty food, who have good digestion
power, in young, and strengthful, the incompatible food will not cause any ill effects.
In those, who are habituated (sathmya) to incompatible food and in those who take low quantities
of incompatible food for a long period of time, the ill effects will not be seen. 47


Satmikarana Krama – (method of accustomization) :-

पादे नाप यम य तं पादपादे न वा यजेत ्
नषेवेत हतं त वदे क व य तर कृतम ् ४८

Unhealthy things – foods, drinks, activities which have become accustomed by long use should
be discontinued by quarter and quarter gradually.
Similarly healthy things (foods etc.) should be gradually made use with intevals of 1, 2 and 3
days. 48.

अप यम प ह य तं शी लतं प यमेव वा
सा   यासा     य वकाराय जायते सहसा अ यथा ४९

Sudden discontinuance of unhealthy things, foods, drinks etc. and indulgence in healthy things,
done suddenly and improperly give rise to diseases 49

 मेणाप चता दोषाः        मेणोप चता गुणाः
स तो या यपुनभावम क            या भवि त च

The ill effects of incompatible foods that eliminated gradually and good habits developed
gradually leads to robust health.

अ य तसि नधानानां दोषाणां द ूषणा मनाम ्
अ हतैद ूषणं भूयो न व वान ् कतुमह त

Wise men should not help the intimate vitiating factors by indulging in unhealthy things.


Trayopastambha - Three pillars of life -

आहारशयना       मचयैयु    या   योिजतैः । शर रं धायते न यमागार मव धारणैः ॥ ५२ ॥

Ahara – food, Shayana – Sleep and Abrahmacharya (non-celibecy) – properly indulged, support
the body constantly just like the house is supported by the pillars.


            Page No. 110                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Sleep – Nidra -

न ाय तं सुखं द ुखं पुि टः का य बलाबलम ्
वष
 ृ ता    ल बता     ानं ानं जी वतं न च ५३

Happiness and unhappiness, proper nourishment or emaciation, strength and debility, sexual
powers and impotence, knowledge and ignorance, life and its absence (death) – all are dependent
on sleep. 53.

अकाले अ स गा च न च न ा नषे वता
सुखायुषी पराकुयात ् कालरा      रवापरा ५४

Akaala nidra – sleep at improper time,
Atiprasanga – excess sleep
Na nidra – lack of sleep – these three destroys health. 54.

रा ौ जागरणं        ं, ि न धं   वपनं दवा
अ       मन भ यि द वासीन चला यतम ् ५५

Ratri jagarana – Keeping awake at nights (avoiding sleep) is dry (causes dryness inside the body),
Divasvapna – sleeping during daytime is unctuous (causes moistness inside) and
Taking a nap sitting comfortably (during day) is neither dry nor unctuous 55.

 ी मे वायुचयादानरौ यरा य पभावतः
दवा व नो हतो अ यि मन ् कफ प तकरो ह सः
मु     वा तु भा ययाना वम य      ीभारकम भः
     ोधशोकभयैः    ला तान ् वास ह मा तसा रणः
व ृ बालाबल ीणत ृ शूलापी डतान ्

Sleeping during day time is beneficial during summer, because in that season, Vata undergoes
mild increase, dryness is more, nights are short;
Day sleeping during other seasons causes Kapha and Pitta increase.


Who can have day sleep?

बहुमेदः कफः      व युः   ने ह न या च नाह न
वषातः क ठरोगी च नैव जात ु नशा व प

Day sleeping is good for those who are exhausted by excessive speaking, riding, walking, wine,
woman (sexual intercourse), carrying heavy load, physical activities, tired by anger, grief and
fear, for those suffering from asthma, hiccup, diarrhea, for the aged, the children, the debilitated,
the emaciated, those having injury, thirst, abdominal pain, indigestion; those assaulted, those


           Page No. 111                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
intoxicated, and those who are habituated to day sleep. In them it maintains the normalcy of the
tissues and the Kapha nourishes the body. 56-59.


Who should not have day sleep?

Obese, in whom Kapha is aggravated, who take regular oily food,
Those who are suffering from poisoning and throat disease patients should not sleep even at
night.

अकालशयना मोह वर तै म यपीनसाः
शरो    शोफ    लास ोतोरोधाि नम दताः ६१
त   उपवासवमन वेदनावनमौषधम ्

Sleeping at improper time causes delusion, fever, lassitude, nasal catarrh, headache, dropsy,
oppression in the chest (nausea), obstruction of the tissue pores and weakness of digestive
function; for this fasting, emesis, sudation and nasal, medications are the treatment. 61-61½.

योजयेद त न ायां ती णं        छदना जनम ्
नावनं ल घनं च तां यवायं शोकभी ु धः
ए भरे व च न ाया नाशः ले मा तस            यात ्

In case of excess of sleep, strong emetics, collyrium, nasal drops, fasting, worry, sexual
intercourse, grief, fear and anger are advocated. By these the Kapha gets decreased leading to
loss of sleep. 62-63.

न ानाशाद गमद शरोगौरवज ृि भकाः
जा य ला न मापि तत         ा रोगा च वातजाः

Loss of sleep leads to squeezing pain in the body parts, heaviness of the head, too much of
yawning, lassitude, exhaustion (even without strain), giddiness, indigestion, stupor and diseases
of Vata origin. 64.

यथाकालमतो न ां रा ौ सेवेत सा        यतः
असा    या जागरादध      ातः   व यादभु तवान ्

Hence, the person should sleep at the proper time at nights daily as much as desirable and
become habituated to it. If he has kept awake at night due to non-habituation (not accustomed to),
he should sleep for half that period, the next morning without taking any food. 65.

शीलये म द न      तु   ीरम यरसान ् द ध
अ य गो वतन नानमध
               ू कणा            तपणम ्
का ताबाहुलता लेषो नव ृ तः कृतकृ यता
मनो अनुकूला वषयाः कामं न ासुख दाः

         Page No. 112                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
  मचायरते ा यसुख नः प ृहचेतसः
न ा स तोषत ृ त य        वं कालं ना तवतते

Those suffering from very little sleep (or no sleep at all), should indulge in the use of milk, wine,
meat soup and curds (as food), oil massage and mild squeezing (of the body), bath, anointing the
head, ears and eyes with nourishing oils, comforting embrace by the arms of the wife, harbouring
the feeling of satisfaction of having done good deeds and resorting to things which are
comforting to the mind as much as desired; these bring about the pleasure of good sleep. For
those who follow the regimen of celibacy, who are not very crazy of sexual intercourse and who
are contented with happiness, sleep will not be very late than its regular time. 66 – 68.


Abrahmacharya – non celibacy -

 ा यधम यजे नार मनु तानां रज वलाम ्
अ याम याचारां द ु टस क णमेहनाम ्
अ त थल
     ू कृशां सत
              ु ां ग भणीय ययो षतम ्
व णनीम ययो नं च ग ु दे वन ृपालयम ्
चै य मशाना आयतनच वारा बुचत ु पथम ्
पव यन गं दवसं शरो दयताडनम ्
अ या शतो अधृ तः       ु वान ् द ुःि थता गः पपा सतः
बालो व ृ ो अ यवे गा त     यजे ोगी च मैथन
                                       ु म्

Sex – the person should avoid the woman who is not lying with her face upward, who is in her
menstrual period, who is not liked, whose activities are displeasing, whose private parts are dirty
and who is troublesome; who is very obese or very emaciated, who has recently delivered and
who is pregnant; The other woman (other than his wife), and the nun, the other animals like the
goat, buffalo etc., should be avoided.

Avoid sex in the abode of the teacher, gods and kings in monasteries, burial ground, places of
torture and of sacrifice and meeting of four roads.
Should avoid days of special significance (new-moon, full-moon, eclipse, festivals, mourning
days and others),
Avoid organs which are non-sexual, (oral etc) and also the days forbidden for sex,
avoid violence during sex.
Should not indulge in sex after a heavy meal, without keen intention, when hungry, when his
body is in uncomfortable postures, when thirsty; with children, with the aged (old women), when
troubled by other urges (such as of urine, faeces etc.) and when he is himself a patient. 69-72.

सेवेत कामतः कामं त ृ तो वाजीकृतां हमे
 यहा वस तशरदोः प ा वषा नदाघयोः

During Hemanta and shishira (winter) the person can indulge in copulation (daily) as much as he
likes after making use of aphrodisiacs (and obtaining strength);


          Page No. 113                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Once in three days in Vasanta (spring) and Sarat (autumn) and
Once a fortnight in Varsha (rainy) and Nidagha (summer). 73.

 म लमो दौब यबलधाि वि           य याः
अपवमरणं च       याद यथा ग छतः ि        यम ्

Giddiness, exhaustion, weakness of the thighs, loss of strength, depletion of tissues, loss of acuity
of senses and premature death occur from improper indulgence in the woman (sexual
intercourse). 74.

 म ृ तमेघायुरारो यपु ट ि    ययशोबलैः ।अ धका म दजरसो भवा त               ीषु संयताः ॥ ७५ ॥

Good memory, intelligence, long life, health, nourishment, acuity of sense organs, reputation,
strength and slow ageing accrue from disciplined (controlled) indulgence in the women. 75.

 नानानुलेपन हमा नलख डखा यशीता बुद ु धरसयूषसुरा स नाः
सेवेत चानु शयनं वरतौ रत य त यैवमाशु वपष
                                      ु ः पन
                                           ु रे त धाम

After the act, the man should indulge himself in bath, applying scented paste, exposure to cool
breeze, drinking of syrup prepared from sugar candy, cold water, milk, meat juice, soup, Sura –
fermented liquor prepared from grains, Prasanna – clear supernatant fluid of Sura and then go to
sleep; by these, the vigour of the body returns quickly to its abode again. 76.

 ुतच रत सम ृ े कमद े दयालौ
भषिज नरनुब धं दे हार ां नवे य
भव त वपुलते जः      वा     यक त भावः
 वकुशलफलभोगी भू मपालि चरायःु

The king who has implicitly reposed the protection of his body with his physician, who is well
conversant with the scriptures and its practices efficient in work and kind, attains great valour,
health, fame, influence, capacity to enjoy the fruits of all his actions and a long life. 77.

Thus ends the 7th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana.


          Page No. 114                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan