Chapter 23 Aschotana Anjana Vidhi अ चोतन अ जन
व ध – Eye drops, Eye salve Therapy
Let us explore Ayurveda eye treatment methods and types. This is the 23rdchapter of Ashtanga
Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter
is called as Aschotana Anjana Vidhi Adhyaya. Aschotana and Anjana refer to eye therapies.


Aschotana = application of liquid drug in the form of drops in the eyes.


Aschotana – Herbal eye drops
In all diseases of the eyes, Aschotana (eye drops) is very beneficial. It helps to prevent
Ruk – eye pain
Toda – pricking pain
Kandu – eye itching
Gharsha – feeling of friction in the eyes
Ashru – excessive lacrimation, tears
Daha – burning sensation
Raga – eye redness. 1.
Drops of medicated liquids should be
warm in case of Vata imbalance.
Lukewarm in Kapha imbalance and
cold in Rakta (blood) and Pitta imbalance.


Aschotana Vidhi – procedure :-
The person should lie on a cot in a place devoid of breeze.
His eyes should be opened with the left hand of the physician
The medicine dispenser, either a seashell or a wick is held in the right hand of the physician just
two Angulas (finger width) above the inner angle of the eye (inner canthus)
10 – 12 drops of the medicated liquid are put into the eye.
Afterwards the eyes should be cleaned with soft cloth.
Mild fomentation is given with a piece of cloth rinsed in warm water in disorders of Kapha and
Vata.

In disorders due to blood and Pitta vitiation, eyes are mopped with a cloth dipped in cold water. 2
–4

Very hot and strong medicinal drops lead to pain, redness and loss of vision;
Very cold drops produce pricking pain, loss of movement of eye balls and discomfort;
Excess therapy produces roughness of the lids, friction and difficulty in opening of the lids;
Inadequate (less) therapy leads to worsening of the diseases, increase of swelling, redness and
absence of lacrimation. 5 – 6.

The medicine dropped into the eye, entering into the channels of the joints (fornices of the eyes),
head, nose and face, eliminates the imbalanced Doshas which have localized in the upper parts of
the body. 7.

          Page No. 277                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Anjana Vidhi – procedure of applying collyrium (eye salve) to the eye :-

अथा जनं       शु तनोने मा ा ये मले
प वल ग        अ पशोफ अ तक डु पैि छ यल          ते ८
म दघषा ुरागे अ          णः   यो यं घनद ू षके
आत प तकफ अ ि भः मा तेन वशेषतः ९

Application of collyrium is suitable for the
person who has his body purified by Vamana, Virechana etc,
in whom the Doshas are localized in the eyes only,
when signs of fully ripened state such as slight oedema (Alpa shopha), severe itching (Ati kandu)
and sliminess (Paichilya) are found, when the excretions of the eyes are thick, in persons who are
being troubled by Pitta, Kapha and blood and
especially in Vata imbalance. 8 – 9.


Anjana is of three kinds –

लेखनं रोपणं     ि त सादन म त         धा

Lekhana – scarifying, scraping
Ropana – healing and
Drishti prasadana – making the vision clear, soothing to the eyes;


Lekhana Anjana

अ जनं लेखनं त           कषाय अ लपदष
                                  ू णैः

is prepared from herbs of astringent, sour, salt, and pungent tastes and hot potency;


Ropana Anjana

रोपणं त तकै       यैः

is prepared from herbs of bitter taste and


Prasadana Anjana

 वाद ुशीतैः   सादनम ्

from herbs of sweet taste and cold potency.


          Page No. 278                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ती णा जना भस त ते नयने त                        सादनं
 यु यमानं लभते              य जनसमा वयम ्

To combat the side effects of strong collyrium, Prasadana Anjana is used. This kind of usage of
one Anjana against the effects of the other is called as Pratyanjana – counter collyrium.


Anjana Shalaka – Collyrium apparatus -

दशा गुल ा तनुम ये           शलाका         मुकुलानना
 श ता,

A metal rod, 10 Angula in length, thin in the middle, with tips resembling a flower bud is best
suited for Anjana application.

लेखने ता ी For Lekhana Anjana, the Shalaka should be made of copper
रोपणे काललोहजा अ गुल च For Ropana, it should be made of iron or finger itself can be used.
सुवण था        यजा च             सादने For Prasadana, Shalaka of gold and silver is used. 12 – 13.


Anjana Bheda – kinds of eye salve -

प डो     रस     या        चुणि     धैवा जनक पना
गुरौ म ये लघौ दोषे तां              मेण     योजयेत ्

Pinda – pill – used in profound imbalance of Dosha
Rasakriya – gel, confection, semisolid got from boiling decoction till solidity - used in moderate
imbalance of Dosha
Churna – powder are the three forms of Anjana – used in mild imbalance of Dosha. 14

हरे णुमा ा     प ड य
ती ण य,        वगुणं       त य       म ृद ुनः

The quantity of Pinda anjana prepared from strong herbs is one Harenu.
The quantity of Pinda Collyrium prepared from mild herbs is two Harenu.

वे लमा ा रस          या

The quantity of eye-salve which is in the form of gel, confection (Rasakriya) shall be that of
Vella (Vidanga),

चू णत य च
 वे शालाके त ु       ती ण य, त              त दतर य च


             Page No. 279                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
the quantity of the eye salve which is in the form of powder (Churna) is two rods full in case of
strong herbs and
three rods full in case of mild herbs. 15.


Anjana Kala – time for:-

नश       व ने न म या ने      लाने नो णगभा त भः१६
अ   रोगयदोषाः     युव धतो पी दत ुताः
 ातः सायं च त छा यै         य ेअकअतो अ जये सदा १७

Application of eye-salve (collyrium) should NOT be made at nights, during sleep, at midday,
when the eyes are fatigued by strong rays of the sun.
If done during these times, it will lead to diseases of the eyes because the Doshas get increased,
spread to other sites and get liquefied.
So to mitigate the Doshas, Anjana should be applied always either in the morning or in the
evening when the sun is not present. 16 – 17.


वद त ये त ु न दवा        यो यं ती णमन जनम ्
वरे कद ुबलं च ुरा द यं    ा य सीद त

Others say, that strong Anjana should not be applied during day, because the eye which has
become weak by purgation treatment from strong herbs will be further debilitated by the presence
of the sun. 18.


Importance of Night and Sleep for Healthy Eyes

 व नेन रा ौ काल य सौ य वेन च त पता
शीत स    या    गा नेयी ि थरतां लभते पुनः

The eye is Agneyi – predominant with the fire element, being habituated to cold comforts it
regains its strength after good sleep and nourished by the coolant nature of the night. 19.

In condition of extreme increase of Kapha or in diseases which require Lekhana Anjana –
scraping type,

अ यु    ते बलासे तु लेख नये अथवा गदे
काममःया प ना यु णे ती णम         ण     योजये त ्

Teekshna Anjana – strong type, can be put into the eyes even during day time, if desired, only if
the day is not very hot. 20.


          Page No. 280                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Eyes are Aagneya

अ मनो    ज म लोह य तत एव च ती णता
उप तोअ प तेनैव     तथा ने    य तेजसः

Metals are born from the ores;

From ores only they – metals derive their sharpness / bluntness. Similarly, the eyes derive their
power and features by Agni – Fire element.

न रा ाव प    शीतेअ त ने े    ती णा जनं हतम ्
दोषम ावये    त धं क डूजा या दका र तत ्

When there is severe cold, application of strong eye-salve is not good even at nights, because it
does not cause elimination of the Doshas from the eyes.

Instead, it produces itching, inactivity etc. Here Doshas get stagnated inside the eyes, even
after Anjana therapy, due to cold effect. 22.


Persons unfit for application of Anjana -Anjana Anarha –

ना जने भीतव मत व र ता शतवे गते
कृ   व रता ता ता     शरो    शोकजागरे
अ    टे अक शरः     नाते पीतयोधूमम ययोः
अजीणअि नअकस त ते दवासु ते पपा सते

Application of Anjana should not be done to persons who are
Bheeta – in fear,
Vamita, Virikta – who have been administered Vamana and Virechana
who are hungry,
Shitavegita – who have urges of urine, faeces etc.,
Kruddha – anger;
Jvarita – during fever,
when the eyes are fatigued,
Shiroruk – during headache,
Shoka – bouts of grief and
Jagara – loss of sleep;
Adurshte Arke – when the sun is fully covered with clouds,
Shira Snate – after head bath,
after inhalation of smoke and drinking of wine,
Ajirne – during indigestion,
fatigued from excess exposure to fire and sun;
Divasupte – soon after sleep during day and
Pipasite – when thirsty. 23 – 24.


          Page No. 281                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Unsuitable Anjan

अ तती णमद
        ृ ु तोकबहु लघनककशम ् । अ यथशीतलं त तम जनं नावचारयेत ्

Anjana, which is very strong or very mild, very little or very large in quantity, very thin or very
thick in consistency, very rough, coarse, very cold or very hot – should not be used. 25

अथानु मीलयन ्      ि तम तः स चारये छनैः
अि जते    व मनी
ती णं    या तो त सहसा , न चो मेष नमेषणम ्
न पीडनं च व म यां          ालनं वा समाचरे त ्

After applying the Anjana, the eye balls should be moved up and rotated slowly, the eyelids
should also be moved slight by massaging over it; by these acts the strong eye salve spreads to all
places. But opening and closing, squeezing or washing of the eyelids should not be done. 26-27.

अपेतौषधसंर भं नवतं
                ृ नयनं यदा
 या धदोषतुयो या भ      ः      ालये तदा

After the cessation of the activity of the drug, when the eyes have regained strength, they should
be washed with water – hot or cold, suitable to the disease, Doshas and season. 28.

द   णा गु टकेना      ततो वामं सवाससा
उ वव म न      स गु य शो यं वामेन चेतरत ्

The physician should lift and hold the upper lid of the left eye with a piece of cloth held in his
right thumb and fingers and wash the left eye; with his left hand, the other eye. 29.

Why to wash Eye after Anjana?

व म ा तो अ जा दोषो रोगान ् कुयादतो अ यथा

Otherwise, if not washed the Anjana remaining in the lids, excites the Doshas which give rise to
diseases.

क द ूजाडये अ जनं ती णं धूमं वा योजये त ् पुनः

In case of itching and inactivity either a strong Anjana should be applied again or an inhalation
of strong smoke of herbs should be done. 30.

ती णा जना भत ते तु चूण           य जनं हमम ्

When the eyes are fatiqued by strong Anjana, applying a Pratyanjana – counter eye-salve
which is in the form of powder and cold in effect should be done. 30½.
Thus ends the chapter Aschotana – Anjana Vidhi – the 23rd of Sutrasthana in Astanga Hrudaya
Samhita written by Srimad Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta.


          Page No. 282                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan