Chapter 21 Dhumpana धुमपान – Medicated Smoking


In this chapter, we are learning in detail about herbal smoking, its benefits, indications, timing,
contra indication etc. This is the 21st chapter of Ashtangahrudayam Sutrasthana, written by
Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta.

ज ू व कफवतो ध वकाराणामज मने
उ छे दाय च जातानां पबे धूमं सदाआ मवान ् १

The person who wishes to take care of his health should inhale herbal smoke daily to treat or to
prevent the onset of diseases of the parts above the shoulders, arising from – increases of kapha
and Vata. 1


Types of Dhumapana –

ि न धो    म यः स ती ण य वाते वातकफे कफे
यो यः
ि न धो वाते
म यःवातकफे
ती ण य कफे

Snigdha Dhuma – lubricating, also known as Mrudu (Soft) / Prayogika – useful in Vata
imbalance.

Madhya Dhuma – medium – useful in Vata and Kapha imbalance. Also known as Shamana
Dhuma

Teekshna Dhuma – strong, useful in Kapha imbalance. Also known as Virechana dhuma
(Purifying). 2


Dhuma Anarhah- person unsuitable for inhalation -

न   र त प ता त व र तोदरमे हषु
त मरो वा नला मानरो हणीद तबि तषु
म   यम यद ू ध ीर ोउ       ने ह वषा शषु
शर या भहते पा डुरोगे जाग रते न श

Inhalation of smoke should not be done for persons who are suffering from
Raktapitta- bleeding disease,
Virikta – who has undergone Virechana therapy,

          Page No. 261                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Udara – ascites, intestinal obstruction
Meha – diabetes, urinary tract disorders
Timira – blindness,
Urdhwa Anila – upward movement of Vata,
Adhmana – Flatulence, bloating
Rohini- a serious disease of the throat, diphtheria,
Datta Basti – who have been administered enema,
who have just eaten fish, wine, curds, milk, honey, fats and poison;
who are injured in the head,
Pandu- anemia and
Jagarita – those who have kept awake at night. 2a – 3a


Side effects of herbal smoking -

र त प ता      य बा धय त ृ     मूछा मद मोहकृत ् ॥४॥ धूमो अकाले अ तपीतो वा त         शीत व ध हत:
।
Doing Dhumapana at improper time or in excess leads to
Rakta pitta- bleeding disease,
Andhya – blindness,
Badhirya – deafness,
Trut – excessive thirst
Murcha – fainting, loss of consciousness
Mada, Moha – delusion
For this cold regimen should be adopted. 5


Treatment

त     शीतो व ध हतः

cold regimen is the ideal treatment


Dhumapana Kala- proper time for inhalation -

Indication for Mridu Dhuma –

    ुतज ृि भत व मू   ीसेवाश     कमणाम ्
हास य द त का ठ य धुमम ते पबे म ृद ुम ्

Mild, lubricating smoke should be inhaled
Kshut – at the end of sneezing,
Jrumbhita – yawing,
Vit – defecation,
Mutra – urination
Striseva – copulation,
shastrakarma – surgical operation,

           Page No. 262                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Hasya – bouts of laughing
Dantakashta – use of tooth brush.


Indication for Madhyama Dhuma –

काले वेषु नशाहारनावना ते च म यमम ्

Medium strength smoke should be inhaled
at the end of the night,
end of the meals and
end of Nasya therapy,


Virechana Dhuma –

न ान यो जन नान छ दता ते वरे चनम ्

purgative, strong smoke should be inhaled
Nidra – at the end of sleep,
Nasya – at the end of Nasya treatment
Anjana – After applying collyrium
Snana – After bath and
Chardi – After vomiting. 5-6


Dhuma yantra- smoking apparatus -

बि तने सम      यं   कोशं कारये त ् ऋजु
मूला ेअ गु ठकोलाि थ वेशं धुमने कम ्

The smoke apparatus should be prepared from the same material as of enema nozzle (from metals
like gold, silver, iron etc);
It should have three chambers
It should be straight
It should permit the entry of the thumb and a Kolasthi- seed of jujube fruit through orifices at this
root and tip respectively. 7
The length of the tube should be
24 Angula (width of one knuckle) for Mrudu (soft, Sneha) Dhuma
32 Angula for medium Dhuma and
40 Angula for strong Virechana Dhuma. 8


          Page No. 263                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pramanam माणं

ती ण नेहनम ये षु           ी ण च वा र प च च
अ गल
   ु ानां      मा पातःु       माणे ना टका न तत ्
ती णं     - 3x 8
    नेहनं - 4 x 8
म यं -       5x8


Dhumapana Vidhi – made of inhalation -

ऋजूप व ट          वव ृता यि    पययम ्
पधाय ि छ मेकैकं            धूमं ना सकया पबे त ्

The patient should sit straight, attentive, with his mouth open and inhale the smoke through each
nostril alternatively,
While inhaling from one nostril, he should close the other.
Inhalation should be done thrice – inhaling the smoke and letting it out together form one bout;
three such bouts should be done each time. 9


Dhuma acording to movement of dosha

    ाक् पबे नासयोि      ल टे दोषे    ाण शरोगते

Smoke should be inhaled through the nose first if the imbalanced Doshas are localized in the nose
and head.

उ     लेशनाथ व       ेण,

If Dosha from nose and head are not coming out, but are adhering, inhalation should be done first
through the mouth to make them move; and later through the nose.

वपर तं तु क ठगे

when the Doshas are localized in the throat – inhalation should be done in reverse order- first by
the nose and later by the mouth.
The smoke inhaled (either from mouth or from nose) should be let out only through the mouth;

नासया       ि वघातकृत ्

if let out through the nose,

    ि वघातकृत ्

            Page No. 264                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
it produces loss of vision -10-11


Time

आ ेपमो ैः पात यो धूम तु         भि    भि    भः

Smoking should be done thrice, with three times inhaling and three exhaling alternately.

अ नः पबे सकृत ् ि न धं,       वम यं , शोधनं परम ्
   चतुवा

Snigdha- lubricating, mild kind of smoke should be taken for only set of three inhalation and
exhalations, during day time.

Madhya- medium kind – two sets of 3 inhales and exhales and

Shodhana- purgative, strong kind, 3 – 4 sets of 3 inhales and exhales.


Herbal smoking blends – Dhuma dravyani –

For Mridu- mild kind of smoke,

म ृदौ त     या यगु गु गुलु
मु त थौणेयशैलेयनलदोशीरवालकम ्
वय गकौ तीमधुक ब वम जैलवालुकम ्
 ीवे टकं सजरसो      यामकं मदनं लवम ्
श लक कुं कुमं माषा यवाः कु द ु काि तलाः
 नेहः फलानां साराणां मेदो म जा वसा घ ृतम ्

useful drugs are-Aguru, Guggulu, Musta, sthauneya, Shaileya, Nalada, Usheera, Valaka,
Varanga, Kounti, Madhuka, Bilvamajja, elavaluka, Shrivestaka, Sarjarasa, Dhyamaka, Madana,
Plava, Shallaki, Kumkuma, Masha, Yava, Kunduruka, Tila, oil obtained from fruits and pith of
trees, fat, Marrow, muscle- fat and ghee. 13-15


For Shamana- Madyama, medium kind of smoke

शमने श लक ला ा प ृ वीका कमलो पलम ्
 य ोधोद ु बरा व थ ल रो       वचः सताः
यि टमधु सुवण वक् प कं र तयि टका
ग धा चाकु ठतगराः


           Page No. 265                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
useful drugs are - shallaki, Laksha,Prithvika, Kamala, Utpala, Barks of Nyagrodha, Udumbara,
Asvattha, Plaksa and Rodhra; Sita, Yasthimadhu (licorice), Suvarnatwak, Padmaka, Raktayastika
Kustha, tagara and other scents – perfumeries.


For Teekshna – strong, Purgative kind of smoke –

ती णे    यो त मती नशा
दशमुलमानो वालं ला ा वेता फल यम ्
ग ध     या ण ती णा न गणो मु व वरे चनः

useful drugs are Jyotismati, Nisha (turmeric), Dashamula, Ala, Laksa, Shweta, Triphala,
Substances which have strong smell and drugs of Murdha Virechana Gana- vide chapter 15, -13-
18


Dhumavarti- preparation of smoke wick-

जले ि थतामहोरा मी षकां       वादशा गुलाम ्
प टैधुमऔषधैरेवम ् प चकृ वः       लेपये त ्
व तर गु ठक थल
            ु ो        यवम या यधा भवेत ्
छाया शु कां वगभ तां       नेहा य तां यथायथम ्
धुमने ा पतां पातुमि न लु टां     योजये त ्

A reed (tall, grass like plant), twelve Angula in length, soaked in water for a day and night,
should be wrapped in five layers-one over the other with a ribbon of cloth;
it is smeared with thin paste of drugs, its thickness being that of the middle portion of the thumb.
It should be dried in shade, removed of its reed, smeared with any suitable fat material (oil /
ghee)
It should be inserted into the smoking tube, lit with fire and the smoke is inhaled. 19-20 ½


Kasaghna Dhuma- Antitussive smoke for cough –

शरावसंपुटि छ े नाडीं     य य दशा गुलां
अ टा गुलां वा व     ेण कासवान ् धुममा पबे त ्

A tube either 10 or 8 Angula in length should be fixed to a hole made in a capsule of earthen
saucers and the person suffering from cough made to inhale smoke – through the tube. 21

Notes- A burning coal / charcoal is placed inside an earthen pot. Powder of herbs is sprinkled
over it and covered with another vessel, having a hole at its center. A tube is connected to the
hole, through which the smoke is inhaled.


          Page No. 266                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Dhumapana Phala- benefits of smoke therapy-

कासः वासः पीनसो व वर वं पु तग धः पा डुता केशदोषः
कण या       ावक     व तजा यं त      ा ह मा धम
                                            ु पं न       पश
                                                          ृ ाि त २२

Cough, Dyspnoea, Rhinitis, Disorders of voice, bad smell – of the nose and mouth, pallor of the
face, disorders of hairs; discharges, itching, pain and in activities – diminution or loss of function
of the ears, mouth and eyes; stupor and hiccup do not affect the person who inhales smoke-
habitually. 22


Thus ends chapter – Dhumapana Vidhi- the twenty first of sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya
Samhita.


          Page No. 267                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan