Chapter 2: Dinacharya दनचया Daily Routine
This is the second Chapter of Ahstanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana – Called as Dinacharya – Ayurvedic
daily routine. Dina means daily, Charya means – regimen/routine. This chapter covers mental,
speech and physical aspects of well being, that you should follow every day.


1. PRATARUTHANA / GETTING UP IN THE MORNING

 ा मे मुहूत उि त ठे    व थो र ाथमायुषः

Healthy person should get up from bed at Brahmi Muhurtha. That is, before dawn, or around 45
minutes before Sun rise, around 5 – 6 am. Last three hours of the night – from 3 am to 6 am – is
known as brahma muhurta.


2-3 – DANTADHAVANA / CLEANING OF TEETH

शर र च तां नव य कृतशौच व ध ततः
अक य ोधख दरकर जककुभा दजम ्
 ातभु   वा च म ृ व ं कषायकटु त तकम ्
कनी य सम थौ यं         गुणं   वादशा गुलम ्
भ ये    तपवनं द तमांसा यबाधयन ्

Keeping in view, the condition of his body, the individual should pass urine and faeces, clean
teeth with any of the twigs of following herbs –
           Arka (Calotropis procera),
           Vata (Ficus benghalensis),
           Khadira (Acacia catechu),
           Karanja (Pongamia pinnata),
           Kakubha (Terminalia arjuna).

To use the twig as tooth brush, the thickness of the twig should be approximately equal to the tip
of one’s little finger. It should be 12 Angula length. The tip of the twig should be chewed a little
to make it as brush. The twig should be of astringent, pungent and bitter in taste.

4. Danta Dhawana Nishedha – Who should not brush teeth -

ना यादजीणवमथु वासकास वरा दती
त ृ णा यपाक    ने शरः कणमयी च तत ्

The following individuals should not do teeth brushing. – people suffering from indigestion,
vomiting, dyspnoea, cough, fever, facial paralysis, excessive thirst, ulceration of mouth, heart
disease, diseases of eyes, head and ears.

          Page No. 16                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
5. Anjana – Collyrium

सौवीरम जनं न यं हतम णो ततो भजेत ् । च ु तेजोमयं त य वशेषात ् ले मतो भयम ् ॥
योजये स तरा ेऽ मात ् ावणाथ रसा जनम ् ।
sauvīramañjanaṃ nityaṃ hitamakṣṇostato bhajet | cakṣustejomayaṃ tasya viśeṣāt śleṣmato
bhayam || yojayetsaptarātre’smāt srāvaṇārthaṃ rasāñjanam |

It is good to apply a special type of collyrium called Sauveera Anjana to the eyes. It should be
applied daily. Rasanjana (aqueous extract of Berberis aristata), should be applied once in a week,
to drain out Kapha (secretions) from the eyes.


6 - Navana and Gandusha

ततो नावनग डूषधूम ता बूलभा भवे त ्

- After collyrium application, healthy person should do Navana (Nasya – Nasal instillation of
drops.). For this purpose, milk, herbal decoctions, herbal oils are usually used.
After that, Gandusha – gargling with warm water, milk, or herbal decoction or herbal oil should
be done. Then Dhuma – inhalation of smoke from herbs and spices should be done, and then
betel leaves should be chewed.


7 – Contra indication for Tambula – betel leaf chewing –

ता बल
    ू ं   त पता       ो कु पतच ुषाम ्
वषमू छामदातानामप यं शो षणाम प

Those suffering from wounds, bleeding diseases, dryness, redness of eye, poisoning,
repeated unconsciousness, intoxication and from tuberculosis should avoid betel leaf chewing.


8-9. Abhyanga – oil massage

अ य गं आचरे त ् न यं , स जरा      मवातहा ।     ि ट   साद पुि ट आयु: सु व न सु वक् दा यकृत ्
॥ शर: वणपादे षु तं वशेषेण शीलयेत ् । व य ऽ य ग: कफ थकृत संशु                  अजी ण भ: ॥
abhyaṅgaṃ ācaret nityaṃ, sa jarā śramavātahā | dṛṣṭi prasāda puṣṭi āyu: susvapna sutvak
dārḍhyakṛt || śira: śravaṇapādeṣu taṃ viśeṣeṇa śīlayet | varjyo’bhyaṅga: kaphagrasthakṛta
saṃśuddhi ajīrṇibhi: ||

Abhyanga means massage. It should be done daily, morning. It delays ageing, relieves tiredness
and excess of Vata (aches and pains). It improves vision, nourishes body tissues, prolongs age,
induces good sleep and improves skin tone and complexion. Massage should be specially done on
ears, head and legs. Massage should be avoided when there is increase of Kapha in the body,
soon after Shodhana (Panchakarma procedure) and during indigestion.


          Page No. 17                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
10. Vyayama – exercise

लाघवं कमसाम य द तोऽि न: मेदस:            य: । वभ तघनगा          वं यायामात ् उपजायते ॥
वात प तामयो बालो व ृ ोऽजीण च तं यजेत ् । अधश              या नषे य तु ब ल भ: ि न धभोिज भ:
॥ शीतकाले वस ते च, म दमेव ततो अ यथा | तं कृ वाऽअनुसुखं दे हं मदयेत ् च सम तत: ॥
lāghavaṃ karmasāmarthyaṃ dīpto’gni: medasa: kṣaya: | vibhaktaghanagātratvaṃ vyāyāmāt
upajāyate || vātapittāmayo bālo vṛddho’jīrṇī ca taṃ tyajet | ardhaśaktyā niṣevyastu balibhi:
snigdhabhojibhi: || śītakāle vasante ca, mandameva tato anyathā | taṃ kṛtvā’anusukhaṃ dehaṃ
mardayet ca samantata: ||

Exercise brings about lightness, it improves work capacity, increases digestion power, burns fat.
It brings body into good shape. People with diseases originating from Vata and Pitta, children,
elders, people with indigestion problem should not do exercise. Exercise should be done till one’s
half strength. Exercise should be done compulsorily by those having full strength and who take
oily food stuff, From December to May. At the end of the exercise, one should undergo mild
massage (pressing the body parts with mild to moderate pressure.)


11-14 Adverse effects of over-exercise:

त ृ णा   यः   तमको र त प तं       मः    लमः
अ त यवायामतः कासो        वर छ द च जायते

Excessive thirst, emaciation, severe dyspnoea (difficulty in breathing), bleeding disorders,
exhaustion, feeling of debility (even without any work), cough, fever and vomiting are caused by
excess of exercise.

 यायामजागरा व       ीहा यभा या द साहसम ्
गजं संहं इवाकषन ् भज ना त वन य त

Those who indulge in too much of exercise daily, who keep themselves awake till late nights,
regularly, who walk long distances regularly, who indulge in excessive sexual activities, too
much of laughing, speaking, and such other strenuous activities, will perish, just as a lion perishes
after vanquishing an elephant.


15. Udvartana –(powder – massage)

उ वतनं कफहरं मेदस: वलायनम ् । ि थर करणं अ गानां वक् सादकरं परम ् ॥
udvartanaṃ kaphaharaṃ medasa: pravilāyanam | sthirīkaraṇaṃ aṅgānāṃ tvak prasādakaraṃ
param ||

Udvartana is using powder for massage. It helps to calm down aggravated Kapha, helps to burn
fat. Hence it is one of the therapies that many Ayurvedic centers offer for anti-obesity treatment.
Udvartana also brings in stability to body organs, improves strength and skin complexion.


          Page No. 18                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
16-18 – Snana – Bathing

द पनं व ृ यमायु यं नानं ऊजा बल दम ् । क डु मल म वेद त ा त ृ दाह पा मिजत ् ॥
dīpanaṃ vṛṣyamāyuṣyaṃ snānaṃ ūrjā balapradam | kaṇḍu mala śrama sveda tandrā tṛṭ dāha
pāpmajit ||

Bathing improves digestion, acts as aphrodisiac, prolongs life, increases enthusiasm and strength.
It helps to get rid of dirt, waste products, sweat, tiredness, excessive thirst, burning sensation and
microbes.

उ णा बन
      ु ा अधकाय य प रषेको बलावहः
तेनैव त ू तमा ग य बल       केशच ुषाम ्

Pouring warm water over the body bestows strength, but the same over the head, makes for loss
of strength of the hair and eyes.

 नानम दतने ा य कणरोगा तसा रषु
आ मानपीनसाजीणभु तव सु च गा हतम ्

Bath is contra- indicated for those suffering from facial paralysis, diseases of the eyes, mouth and
ears, diarrhoea, flatulence, rhinitis, indigestion and who have just taken food.


19. Sad Vritta – Good/healthy conduct:

जीण हतं मतं चा यात ् न वे गानीरयेत ् बलात ् । न वे गतो अ यकाय:              यात ् न अिज वा सा यं
आमयम ् ॥ jīrṇe hitaṃ mitaṃ cādyāt na vegānīrayet balāt | na vegito anyakārya: syāt na ajitvā
sādhyaṃ āmayam || Jeerne hitam mitam chaadyat – One should always eat, only after digestion of
previous food, in limited quantity.

Na vegan neerayet – one should not induce natural urges forcefully. Example: urinating, when
there is no urge to pass urine.
Na Vegito anya kaaryaha – one should immediately attend to natural urges, whenever they come,
without being busy in other activities.
One should undergo treatment to diseases as soon as possible.


20-21 Words of wisdom: Path of righteousness:

सुखाथा: सवभूतानां मता: सवा: व ृ तय: । सुखं च न वना धमात ् त मात ् धमपरो भवे त ् ॥
sukhārthā: sarvabhūtānāṃ matā: sarvā: pravṛttaya: | sukhaṃ ca na vinā dharmāt tasmāt
dharmaparo bhavet ||

All the creatures are behind happiness. There is no happiness, without righteousness. Hence all
should follow the path of righteousness.


          Page No. 19                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
भ   या क याण म ा ण सेवे तेतरद ूरगः

Friends should be served with affection and good deeds, whereas the others (wicked) should be
kept at a distance.


22. 10 types of bad deeds

हंसा   तेय अ यथा कामं पैशु यं प ष अनृते । सि भ न आलाप यापाद अ भ या                         क् वपययम ्
॥ पापं कम त दशधा काया वा मनसै: यजेत ् ।
hiṃsā steya anyathā kāmaṃ paiśunyaṃ paruṣa anṛte | sambhinna ālāpa vyāpāda abhidyā dṛk
viparyayam || pāpaṃ karmeti daśadhā kāyā vāṅ manasai: tyajet |

These ten sins pertaining to the body, speech and mind should be avoided.
          Himsa (causing injury, torture etc.)
          steya ( stealing, robbing),
          anyathakama (unlawful sexual activity, desiring for others),
          paisunya (abusive or harsh speech ),
          parusha vachana (harsh speech)
          Anruta vacana ( speaking untruth),
          sambhinna alapa (speech causing separation, breaking of company),
          vyapada (quarrel, intention of harming ),
          abhidya (jealousy, not tolerating good of others) and
          drgviparyaya ( finding fault, misunderstanding, faithlessness etc. with scriptures,
          elders etc)

Of these ten, the first three are related to body, next four- related to speech and last three – related
with mind.


22-47 अव ृि त या धशोकाताननुवतत शि ततः

Those who have no means of livelihood, who are suffering from diseases and who are afflicted
with grief should be helped.

आ मव सततं प येद प क ट पपी लकम ् अचये ेवगो व व ृ वै यन ृपा तथीन ्

Even the insects and ants should be seen with respect, similar to a physician, king and guests.

वमुखा ना थनः कुया नावम येत ना            पे त ्

Beggars should not be disappointed, abused or objected.

उपकार धानः      यादपकारपरे अ यरौ स प वप            वे कमना,हे तावी य फले न तु

One should be very helpful even to his foes, even though they are not helpful.
Sampat Vipatsu Eka manaaha: One should maintain a balanced mind both during calamity and
prosperity.
One should not be envious towards wealth and happiness of others.
          Page No. 20                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
काले हतं मतं      ूया वसंवा द पेशलम ्

Kale bruyat – speak only on the right occasion.
Hitam bruyat – speak good words, be pleasant.
Mitam bruyat – speak little, as per necessity.
Do not argue, do not say untrue things.

पूवा भभाषी, सुमुखः सुशीलः क णाम ृद ुः
नैकः सुखी, न सव      व    धो न श कतः
न कि चदा मन श ुं ना मानं क य च पुम ्
 काशये नापमानं न च नः नेहतां         भोः

Purva abhibhashi _ be the first to greet, to start conversation
sumukhaha – have a smiling face
susheelaha – have good character
karuna, mrudu: – be courteous, be soft in speech and activity.
Na Eka sukhee – Do not be a person who likes to be alone always.
Na sarvata: vishrabdo – do not believe everything around you
Na shankhitaha – do not suspect everything around
Do not instantly think someone as your foe or that he is a foe of someone else.
Do not publicly talk about insults that you underwent,
Do not publicly talk about disaffection towards your king (boss/ master / senior, in today’s
context)

जन याशयमाल य यो यथा प रतु य त
तं तथैवानुवतत पराराधनपि डतः

Keeping in mind the nature of he people, one should deal with them in such manner as bet
pleasing to them, becoming well-versed in the art of adoring others.

न पीडये दि    या ण न चैता य तलालयेत ्

The sense organs should neither be strainedvery much nor should they be fondled or very much.

  वगशू यं नार भं भजे तं चा वरोधयन ्

Do not engage yourself in things that are devoid of three pursuits (dharma (righteousness), arha,
(wealth) and kama (pleasure) ): should carry on the occupation without going contrary to them
(dharma and karma).

अनुयाया      तपदं सवधमषु म यमाम ्

In all dealings (activities) one should adopt the middle mean only, avoid extremes.


          Page No. 21                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Personal hygiene:

नीचरोमनख म ु नमला          मलायनः
 नानशीलः सस
          ु रु भः सव
                   ु ेषो अनु बणो          वलः

One should cut his hair, nails, and moustaches regularly.
Keep feet, ears, nose, eyes, urethra and anus clean
Take bath daily, put on scents and good dress which is not superfluous but is pleasant to look at.

धारये सततं र न स म        महौषधीः
सातप पद ाणो वचरे युगमा         क्
न श चा य यके काय द डी मौल सहायवान ्

Wear precious stones, potent hymns and herbs (kept inside amulets) on the body.
Walk holding an umbrella, putting on foot wear and looking straight to a distance of four arms
length in front of you.
In case of urgent work at nights, one should go equipped with a baton, head- dress and an
assistant.

चै यपूज वजाश त छायाभ मतुषाशुचीन ्
ना ामे छकरालो टब ल नानभुवो न च

One should not invade on the shade of a holy tree on which deities reside (or a Buddhist shrine),
materials (or men) of worship, banner and unholy thing, heap of ash, husk and dirt, sand dunes,
boulders, places of bali (offering sacrifices to Gods, demons etc.) and bathing.

नद ं तरे न बाहु यां, नाि न क धम भ जेत ्
सि द धनावं व ृ ं च नारोहे दद ु टयानवत ्

One should not swim across rivers with arms, should not walk facing huge fire, should not travel
in a risky boat, not climb a tree doubtful of strength; or ride on a vehicle, which is in bad
condition.

नासंव ृतमुखः कुया    ु तहा य व ु भणम ्

One should not sneeze, laugh or yawn without covering his mouth.

ना सकां न वकु णीया नाक मा व लखे ुवम ्
ना गै चे टे त वगुणं, नासीतो कटकि चरम ्

One should not blow his nose (except for forcing out the dirty excretion); not scratch the ground
without any reason, not do ugly movements of the parts of the body and sit on ones own heels
for a long time.


         Page No. 22                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
दे हवा चे तसां चे टाः ाक्    मा व नवतये त ् नो वजानुि चरं त ठे त ्

One should stop the activities of the body, of speech and of the mind before getting exhausted;
should not keep his knees above for long period (keeping erect folded at the knee while sleeping
or standing on the hands keeping the legs up etc. )

न तं सेवेत न     ूवम ्
तथा च वरचै या त चतु पथसुरालयान ्
सुनाटवीशू यग ृह मशाना न दवा अ प न

One should not reside at night on trees, meeting place of three roads, or places where people
assemble for recreation, vicinity of a holy tree (or a Buddhist shrine), meeting place of four roads
and temple, (house of god). One should not reside even during daytime, in a place of slaughter, a
forest, haunted house and burial ground.

सवथे ेत ना द यं, न भारं शरसा वहे त ्
ने ेत     ततं सू मं द तामे या या ण च

No one should gaze at the sun for a long time, should not carry heavy weight on his head, not see
continuously objects which are minute, shining, dirty and unpleasant.

म य व यस धानदानादाना न नाचरे त ्

One should not engage in selling, brewing, free distributing, or receiving of wine .

पुरोवातातपपरज तुषारप षा नलान ्
अनज
  ृ ःु     वथु गारकास व ना नमैथन
                               ु म्
कूलछायां न ृप व टं यालदंि        वपा णनः
ह नानाया त नपुणसेवां व        मु तमैः
स    या व यवहार      ी व ना ययन च तनम ्
श ुस गणाक णग णकाप णकाशनम ्
गा      व नखैवा यं ह तकेशावधूननम ्
तोयाि नपू यम येन यानं धूमं शवा यम ्
म या तसि तं व            भ वात ये       ीषु च यजेत ्

The person should avoid the direct breeze, sunlight, dust, snow(dew), hard breeze (whirlwind
etc);
should not sneeze belch, cough, sleep, dine or copulate in improper postures,
should avoid the shade of a scaffold, places hated by the king (or government), company of wild
animals, biting animals and those with horns; of mean, wicked (uncivilised and very intelligent
persons);
avoid quarrel with good men;
avoid taking foods, sex, sleeping, study and recapitulation at the time of meeting of the night and

           Page No. 23                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
sunrise,
Avoid the food given by enemies, given during sacrificial ceremony, (that offered by large group
of donors of different castes), that given by prostitutes and merchants;
one should not make sound with the body parts, mouth and nails, nor shake the hand and hairs;
should not move in between two (receptacles of ) water, fire and the worshipful; should avoid the
smoke of a cadaver; too much indulgence, in wine (drinking), believing and independence for
 (wicked) women.

आचायः सवचे टासु लोक एव ह धीमतः
अनुकुया तमेवातो लौ ककेअथ पर         कः

For an intelligent person the world is a teacher, hence one should imitate the world after carefully
considering their meaning and effects of such actions.

आ स तानता यागः कायवा चेतसां दमः
 वाथबु ः पराथषु पया त म त स          तम ्

Compassion with all living beings, granting of gifts, controlling the activities of the body, speech
and mind; feeling of selfishness in the interests of others (looking after the interest of others as
his own) these are sufficient rules of good conduct.

न तं दना न मे याि त कथ भूत य स              त
द ुःखभा न भव येवं न यं सि न हत म ृ तः

He, who constantly thinks of how his day and night are passing and adopts the right way, will
never become a victim of sorrow.

इ याचारः समासेन , यं    ा नो त समाचरन ्
आयुरारो यमै वय यशो लोकां च शा वतान ्

Thus was enumerated, in brief the rules of good conduct; he who adopts it will (surely) attain
long life, health, wealth, reputation and also the eternal world.

Thus ends the chapter called Dinacarya, the second in sutrasthana of Astanga hrudaya composed
by Srimad Vaghata, son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta.


          Page No. 24                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan