Chapter 5 Drava Vigyaniya व व ानीय Drinkables
The 5th chapter of Sutrasthana is known as Dravadravya Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. It deals with types
and health benefits of all the liquid foods. It details types and benefits of water, milks, dairy
products, sugarcane juices, honey, oils, wines and urine.


Toya varga –(group of waters)


Gangambu – benefits of drinking rain water

जीवनं तपणं    दयं   लाद बु        बोधनम ्
तनु अ य तरसं म ृ टं शीतं लघु अम ृतोपमम ् १
ग गा बु नभसो        टं   प ृ टं तु अक द ुमा तैः
हता हत वे त य
            ू ो दे शकालावपे ते २

Rain water is which has come into contact with Sunlight, Moon light and wind is
Jeevaneeya – Enlivening, improves quality of life
Tarpana – satiating
Hrudya – good for heart
Hladi – calming and soothing to the mind and stomach
Buddhi praboodhanam – Stimulates intellect
Tanu – thin
Avyaktarasa – imperceptible taste
Sheeta – cold
Laghu (light to digest)
Amrutopama – similar to nectar
Whether rain water is good or bad depends on the season and place where it rains.

Notes – The properties described above are of rain water collected in a clean vessel directly, a
little while after the commencement of rain. It should be consumed within a few hours as it loses
its properties. With the increasing industrialization and pollution, the rain water has lost its
qualities nowadays. Hence, may not be good to consume.


Test for quality:

येना भव ृ टममलं शा य नं राजते ि थतम ्
अि ल नम ववण च त पेयं गा गम ्

Only that rain water which makes the boiled rice kept in a clean silver plate neither too moist
nor change its color is to considered as good for drinking. 2 ½


         Page No. 47                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Samudramdu (seawater qualities) :-

अ यथा सामु ं, त न पात यं मासादा वयुजा वना

Seawater should not be used for drinking expect during Ashvayuja month. (September.
October/autumn season). 3

Notes:- During Ashvayuja month there will be the appearance of Agastya nakshatra (the star
Canopus) which is said to remove the poisonous properties of water and other things of the earth,
hence permission to use other kinds of water for drinking during this month.

ए   म बु सुपा    थम वप नं सदा पबे त ्
तदभावे च भू म ठमा त र ानुका र यत ्
शु चप ृ व सत वे ते दे शे अकपवनाहतम ्

Rain water, collected in clean vessel and which has not changed in color taste and odor, should be
used for drinking always. In its absence, the water of the earth, which resembles rainwater in all
its qualities, collected from clean vast place that has black or white soil, which is exposed to
sunlight and breeze.


Dushtajala – (contaminated water)

न पबे प कशैवालत ृणपणा वला त ृतम ्
सुय द ुपवना   टम भव ृ टं घनं ग ु
फे नलं ज तुम त तं द त ा य तशै यतः
अनातवं च य      यमातवं    थमं च यत ्
लूता दत त ु व मू वषसं लेषद ू षतम ्

Water which is dirty, mixed with mud, algae, weeds and leaves, which is not exposed to sunlight
and wind, which is a mixture of old and fresh, which is thick, not easily digestible, frothy,
containing worms, hot (by nature), causes tingling of teeth by being very cold, that rain water
which is un-seasonal or though seasonal that of the first rain (before the appearance of Agastya
Nakshatra, that contaminated with the webs, saliva, urine, faeces of spider etc., and such other
poisonous materials, should not be used for drinking. 6-7 ½


Nadijala –(river water benefits)

पि चमोद धगाः शी वहा या चामलोदकाः
प याः समासा ता न या वपर ता         वतो अ यथा

Water of the rivers which flow into the western ocean (Arabian sea), which are sweet and which
have pure water (uncontaminated) is good for health, where as that flowing into eastern ocean is
not ideal for consumption. 8

         Page No. 48                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
उपला फालना ेप व छे दैः खे दतोदकाः
हमव मलयो त
         ू ाः प या ता एव च ि थराः
कृ म ल पद     क ठ शरोरोगान ् कुवते

The water of rivers arising from Himalaya and Malaya mountains, and which get churned up well
by dashing against rocks are good for health, whereas the same water if gets stagnated (and gets
contaminated) gives rise to worms (intestinal parasites), filariasis, diseases of the heart, throat and
head. 9-10

 ा या यपरा तो था द ुनामा न, महे        जाः
उदर ल पदात कान ्, स या व       यो वाः पुनः
कु ठपा डु शरोरोगान ्, दोष   यः पा रया जा
बल पौ    यका र यः, सागरा भि        दोषकृत ्

Water of rivers of the Prachya (gauda), Avanti (malwa) Aparanta (konkana) countries causes
hemorrhoids. Water of rivers arising from Mahendra mountains cause enlargement of the
abdomen and filariasis; those arising from Sahya and Vindhya mountains causes leprosy (and
other skin disease) anaemia and diseases of the head; of those arising from Pariyatra, mitigate the
(aggravated) dosas, bestow strength and sexual vigour, the water of the sea causes vitiation of all
the three dosas. 11-12.

Notes:- Pracya or Gauda desa comprises of central Bengal and parts of Orissa Avanti or Malwa
country was round about the modern city of Ujjain. Aparanta or konkana comprises of Goa,
karwr and north kanara districts of Karnataka. Mahendra mountain is the northern part of the
eastern gaths, (the whole range of hills extending from Orissa to the district of Madura was
known by the western Ghats. Vindhyas are mountain ranges of central India. Prriyatra is the
western part of the Vindhya mountains.

व या कूपतडाकाद न ् जा गलानूपशैलतः

The water of kupa (deep well), tadaga (artificial pond) etc., should be considered to be similar (in
qualities and properties) to those of the desert, marshy and mountains (respectively). 12 ½


Jalapana varja- (avoiding of drinking water)

ना बु पेयमश     या वा    व पम पाि नगुि म भः
पा डूदरा तसाराश हणीशोषशो थ भः
ऋते शरि नदाघा यां पबे        व थो अ प चा पशः

Water should not be consumed or consumed in very little quantity, by those suffering from poor
digestive function, tumors of the abdomen, anaemia, enlargement of the abdomen, diarrhoea,
haemorrhoids, diseases of the duodenum, dropsy.
Excepting for Sharad (autumn) and Nidagha (summer) even healthy persons should drink less
quantity of water in all other seasons 13-14

          Page No. 49                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Jalapana phala- (effects of drinking water with respect to meals)

सम थूलकृशा भु तम या त थमा बुपाः

Drinking water in between meals – healthy habit
Drinking water after meals – causes obesity
Drinking water before meals – causes emaciation, weakness


Sheetajala (cold water)

शीतं मदा यय ला नमू छा छ द म मान ्
त ृ णो णदाह प ता    वषा य बु नय छ त १५

Cold water relieves
Madatyaya – alcoholic intoxication,
Glani – exhaustion,
Murcha – fainting,
Chardi – vomiting,
Shrama – debility (fatigue),
Bhrama – dizziness, giddiness,
Trushna – thirst,
Ushna – heat (of the sun) burning sensation,
Pittasra – bleeding conditions and Pitta dominant conditions
and Visha – poison.15


Ushnajala-hot water drinking benefits

द पनं पाचनं क      यं लघू णं बि तशोधनम ् १६
ह मा माना नल ले मस यः शु नव वरे
कासामपीनस वासपा व         ु च श यते १७

Hot water
Deepana – stimulates hunger,
Pachana – helps digestion,
Kantya – good for the throat,
Laghu – easily to digest,
Basti shodhana – cleanses the urinary bladder,

Relieves
Hidhma – relives hiccup,
Adhmana – flatulence,
Anila – aggravation of Vata
Shleshma – aggravation of Kapha
It is ideal on the days of Panchakarma therapy
Navajvara – fever of recent origin
Kasa – cold, cough
         Page No. 50                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Ama – accumulation of undigested materials,
Peenasa – rhinitis (running nose),
Shwasa – dyspnoea and
Parshvaruja – pain in the flanks. 16-17

अन भ यि द लघु च तोयं          वाथे तशीतलम ्
प तयु ते हतं दोषे , यु षतं त दोषकृत ् १८

Water which is boiled and then cooled
Anabhishyandi – does not increase moisture or stickiness in the body
Laghu – light to digest

Useful in Pitta conditions.

Water which is kept overnight, is not ideal for consumption. It increases Tridosha. 18.


Narikelodaka- (coconut water benefits):-

ना रकेलोदकं ि न धं     वाद ु व ृ यं हमं लघु
त ृ णा प ता नलहरं द पनं बि तशोधनम ् १९

Tender coconut water is
Snigdha – unctuous, oily
Swadu – sweet,
Vrushya – aphrodisiac,
Hima – coolant,
Laghu – easy to digest

Relieves
Trushna – thirst,
Pittanila hara – balances Pitta and Vata.
Deepana – increases hunger and
Bastishodhana – cleanses urinary bladder.19

वषासु द यनादे ये परं तोये वरावरे
इ त तोय वगः

During varsa (rainy season) rain water is best and river water least suitable for consumption. 19
½


          Page No. 51                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Ksheera varga –(group of milk and milk products)

अथ      ीरवगः
 वादप
    ु ाकरसं ि न धमोज यं धातव
                           ु धनम ् २०
वात प तहरं व ृ यं ले मलं गु    शीतलम ्
 ाय: पय:

Generally milk is
Svadupakarasa – sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion,
Snigdha – unctuous,
Ojovardhana – increases Ojus,
Dhatuvardhana – nourishes and increases body tissues,
Vata Pittahara – mitigates Vata and Pitta,
Vrushya – aphrodisiac,
Shleshmala – increases kapha
Guru – heavy to digest
Sheetala – coolant. 20-21

Goksheera –(cow milk benefits):-

अ     ग यं तु जीवनीयं रसायनम ्
    त ीण हतं मे यं ब यं    त यकरं सरम ्
 म ममदाल मी वासकासा दत ृ          ुधः
जीन वरं मू कृ     ं र त प तं च नाशयेत ्

Cow’s milk
Jeevaneeya – promotes long life,
Rasayana – anti aging, rejuvenating
Kshataksheena hita – good for those emaciated after chest injury
Medhya – increases intelligence,
Balya – strengthening
Stanyakara – promotes breast milk production
Sara – helps easy movement of the bowels

Relieves
Shramahara – exhaustion,
Bhramahara – dizziness
Mada – toxicity,
Alakshmi - in-auspiciousness
Shwasa – dyspnoea,
Kasa – cough,
Atitrut Kshudha – severe thirst and hunger,
Jeernajvara – chronic fevers,
Mutrakrichra – dysurea
Raktapitta - bleeding diseases 21 1/2


           Page No. 52                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Mahisha ksheera – (buffalo milk benefits)

हतं अ यि न अ न े यो गर यो मा हषं हमम ् ॥ २३ ॥

Buffalo milk is good for people with very good digestion power, who suffer from Anidra –
insomnia. It is a coolant. 23


Aja ksheera-(Goat milk benefits):-

अ पा बप
      ु ान यायाम कटु त ताशनैः लघु
आजं शोष वर वासर त प ता तसारिजत ् २४

Goat drinks less water and does a lot of walking. It eats pungent and bitter grass and vegetables
that are light to digest. Hence goat milk also carries these qualities.

Goat milk is useful in
Shosha – emaciation
Jvara – fever
Shwasa – dyspnoea, asthma, chronic bronchial disorders
Raktapitta – bleeding disorders of Pitta origin such as haemorrhoids, nasal bleeding
Atisara – diarrhoea, dysentery. 24


Ustra ksheera (camel milk benefits) –

इष ू ो णलवणमौ       कं द पनं लघु
श तं वातकफानाहकृ मशोफोदराशसाम ् २५

Ushtra ksheera (milk of camel)- is
Ishat ruksha – slightly dry
ushna – hot
Lavana – salty taste
Deepana – increases digestion strength
Laghu – easy to digest
Vatakaphaan shastam – useful in Vata and Kapha
Krumi – relieves worm infestation
Shopha – anti inflammatory
Udara – useful in ascites
Arshas – haemorrhoids. 25


         Page No. 53                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Manusha ksheera – (breast milk benefits):-

मानुषं वात प तस ृग भघाता      रोगिजत ्
तपणा चोतनैन यैः

Breast milk is useful in
Vata and Pitta imbalance disorders
Asruk – blood vitiation disorder
Abhighata – useful in injuries
Akshirooga – it is used as eye drops to relieve eye infections and to relieve redness.
It is used in Tarpana and Ashchottana types of eye treatments. It is also used as nasal drops. 26.


Avika ksheera – (ewe’s milk):-

अ   यं त ृ णमा वकम ् २६
वात या धहरं ह मा वास प तकफ दम ्

Eve’s milk is not good for heart, hot in nature, useful in Vata disorders, gives rise to hiccup,
respiratory conditions. It increases Pitta and Kapha. 26 ½


Hastiksheera (Elephant milk benefits) - हि त याः         थैय कृत ् It is strengthening in nature.


Ekashapha ksheera- (milk of single hoofed animals):-

वाढमु णं वै कशफं लघु
शाखावातहरं सा ललवणं जडताकरम ्

Milk of single hoofed animals (like horse, donkey, etc) is very hot (in potency), useful in vata
disorders, is slightly sour and salt and causes lassitude (laziness).


Uncooked milk is

पयो अ भ यि द गुवामं , यु     या श ृतमतो अ यथा २८
भवे गर यो अ तश त
               ृ ं, धारो णमम त
                             ृ ोपमम ्

Abhisyandi (causes excess secretion in the tissue pores, causing their blockage)
Guru – heavy to digest
Amakara – causes Ama and indigestion
Yuktya shrutam amrutopamam – if it is properly boiled, it is similar to nectar. Otherwise, it is
poison.
Dharoshna – Milk drawn from udder (nipple) direct in to mouth is similar to nectar. (Provided
cow is perfectly healthy without any infection)

          Page No. 54                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Dadhi (curds benefits/soured milk/coagulated milk)

अ लपाकरसं      ा ह गु   णं द ध वातिजत ् २९
मेदः शु बल ले म प तर ताि नशोफकृत ्
रो च णु श तम चौ शीतके वषम वरे ३०
पीनसे मू कृ    े च,     ं तु    हणीगदे
नैवा याि न श नैवो णं वस तो ण शर सु न ३१
नामु गसूपं ना ौ ं त नाघ ृत सतोपलम ्
न चानामलकं ना प न यं णो म थम यथा ३२
 वरास ृि प तवीसपकु ठपा डु म दम ्

Curd has
Amla rasa – sour taste
Amla paka – undergoes sour taste conversion after digestion
Grahi - absorbent, useful in diarrhoea,
Guru – heavy to digest
Ushna – hot in nature
Vatajit – balances Vata
Increases Meda (fat), Shukra (semen), Bala (strength), Kapha, Raktapitta (bleeding disorders),
Agni (digestion strength) and shotha (inflammation).
Rochishnu – increases taste

Curd Useful in
aruchau – useful in anorexia
Vishamajwara – chronic, recurrent fever
Peenasa – rhinitis
Mutrakruchra – dysuria
Grahani – malabsorption syndrome

Rules for curds consumption:
Curd should not be eaten at nights, not made hot,
Curd should not be taken along with green gram soup
It should not be taken along with honey, ghee, sugar and Amla.
It should not be taken daily. If used daily, it may cause / worsen fever, bleeding disorders, skin
diseases, anemia and dizziness. 29-32


Takra –(Fat-less buttermilk):-

त ं लघु कषाया लं द पनं कफवातिजत ् ३३
शोफोदराश हणीदोषमू         हा चः
 ल हगु मघ त
          ृ याप गरपा           वामयान ् जयेत ् ३४


          Page No. 55                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Takra (butter milk) - churned curds
Laghu – easy to digest
Kashaya, amla – sour, astringent,
Deepana – improves digestion strength
Kaphavatjit – balances Kapha and Vata

Useful in
Shopha – inflammatory conditions
Udara – ascites
Arsha – hemorrhoids
Grahani – malabsorption syndrome
Mutradosha, Mutragraha – urine infection, dysuria
Aruchi – anorexia
Pleeha – splenomegaly
Gulma – abdominal distention
Ghritavyapat – in indigestion caused by excess consumption of ghee
Gara visha – chronic intoxication and
Pandu – anemia


Mastu – Supernatent liquid of curds (whey/watery part of curds) :-

त व म तु सरं       ोत: शो ध व ट भिजत ् लघु ।

Mastu is similar to buttermilk. It is
Sara – promotes movement of fluids inside body channels
Srotashodhi – cleanses body channels
Vishtambhajit – relieves constipation
Laghu – easy to digest.


Navanita (Butter):-

नवनीतं नवं व ृ यं शीतं वणबलाि नकृत ् ३५
स     ा ह वाता पतास ृ    याश दतकासिजत ्
    ीरो वं तु स   ा ह र त प ता   रोगिजत ् ३६

Fresh Navanita (butter) is
Vrushya – aphrodisiac,
Sheeta – coolant
Varna, bala, agnikrut – improves skin complexion, strength and digestion strength.
Sangrahi – abosrbent, useful in diarrhoea
Vatapittasruk jit – balances Vata, Pitta and detoxifies blood

Useful in
Kshaya – chronic respiratory disorders leading to emaciation
Arsha – hemorrhoids
Ardita vata – paralysis
Kasa – cough
           Page No. 56                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
The butter made directly from milk is
Sangrahi – absorbent, useful in diarrhoea
Raktapittajit – useful in bleeding disorders
Akshirogajit – useful in eye diseases. 35-36.


Ghrita – (ghee/clarified butter):-

श तं धी म ृ तमेधाि नबलायःु शु च ुषाम ्
बालव ृ   जाकाि तसौकुमाय वारा थनाम ् ३७
     त ीणपर सपश     ाि न ल प ता मनाम ्
वात प त वषो मादशोषाल मी वरापहम ् ३८
 नेहानामु तमं शीतं वयसः      थापनं परम ्
सह वीय व ध भघतं
             ृ कमसह              ु त ् ३९

Ghee is ideal for improving intelligence; memory, ingenuity, digestion strength, long life, semen
(sexual vigour), and eye sight. Ghee is good for children, the aged, those who desire more
children, tenderness of the body, and pleasant voice, for those suffering from emaciation as a
result of injury to chest (lungs), Parisarpa (herpes), injury from weapons, and fire, disorders of
Vata and Pitta origin, poison, insanity, inauspicious activity (witchcraft, etc.) and fevers;

Of all the fatty materials, ghee is the best.
It is coolant, best for retaining of youth; capable of giving a thousand good effects by a thousand
kinds of processing. 37-39.


Purana ghrita – Old ghee

मदाप मारमू छाय शरः कणा         यो नजान ्
पुराणं जय त याधीन ् नशोधनरोपणम ् ४०

Purana Ghrita (old ghee) is used in the treatment of
Mada – intoxication,
Apasmara – epilepsy,
Murcha – fainting,
Shira, karna, akshi yoni roga – diseases of the head, ear, eye and vagina;
Old ghee cleanses and heals wounds. 40.


Milk preparations, fatty dairy products:

ब याः कलाटपीयूषकू चकामोरणादयः
शु    न ाकफकरा व टि भगु दोषलाः ४१

Kilata, Piyusa, Kurcika, Morana, etc. are strengthening, increase the semen, sleep and Kapha,
cause constipation, heavy to digest, and aggravate the Doshas. 41.
          Page No. 57                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Notes - Kilata is the solid portion obtained after heating curds or buttermilk, Piyusa is the milk of
cow which has just given birth to a calf, upto a period of about three days or till the milk becomes
thin; Kurcika is the solid portion obtained after heating buttermilk while Morana (or Morata) is
the sour, thin liquid portion.

ग ये     ीरघ ृते   े ठे नि दते तु आ वस भवे ॥

Milk and ghee obtained from cows milk are best and those obtained from ewe’s milk, the
least. 41½.


Iksu Varga – (group of sugarcane juice and its products)

Iksurasa Guna – (properties of sugarcane juice) :-

अथे ु वगः
इ ोः सरो गु ः ि न धो बं ृहणः कफमू कृत ् ४२
व ृ यः शीतो अ      प त नः   वाद ुपाकरसो रसः

Juice of sugar cane is
Sara (laxative),
Guru – heavy to digestion
Snigdha – unctuous
Brihmana – nutritive, improves weight
Kaphakrut – increases Kapha
Mutrakrut – increases urine volume
Vrushya – aphrodisiac
Sheeta – coolant
Asrapittaghna – useful in bleeding disorders
Swadupaka rasa – sweet. 42.

सो अ े सलवणो, द तपी डतः शकरासमः
मूल ज तुद धा दपीडना मलस करात ्
कि च कालं व ु या च वकृ त ं या त याि            कः
वदा ह गु व ट भी तेनासौ

The tip of shoots of sugarcane has salt taste. If the roots, shoots and worm infested parts of the
cane is crushed together, the juice gets mixed with dirty material. It leads to burning sensation,
indigestion and constipation. 43-44.

त   पौ    कः
शै य सादमाधुयवर तमनु वां शकः

The Poundraka variety of cane is best in view of its coolant, effect, thinness and more sweetness
of its juice; next to it is the Vamsika variety. 45.


           Page No. 58                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
शतपवकका तारनै पाला या ततः          मात ्
स ाराः सकषाया च सो णाः कि च वदा हनः

Next are the Sataparvaka, Kantara, Naipala etc., in respective order, are slightly Alkaline and
astringent in taste, hot in potency and cause burning sensation slightly. 46.


Phanita – (half – cooked molasses, unrefined treacle) :-

फा णतं गुव भ यि द चयकृत ् मू शोधनम ् ।

Phanita (half – cooked molasses) is heavy (hard to digest), Abhisyandi (increasing the secretions
in the tissues pores and blocking them), causes mild increase of Tridosha and cleanses the urine
(by increasing its quantity).


Guda – (jaggery/molasses/treacle) :-

ना त ले मकरो धौतः स ृ ट मू शकृ गुडः ४७
 भूतकृ मम जास ृ मे दोमांस कफो अपरः

Guda (jaggery, molasses), washed well (made white and purified)-
Natishleshma kara – does not increase Kapha to a large extent
Srushtamutrashakrut – increases volume of urine and faeces
If it is not prepared properly, it causes intestinal worms, increases chances of Kapha disorder in
marrow, blood, fat tissue and muscles.

    यः परु ाणः प य च , नवः ले माि नसादकृत ् ४८

Old jaggery is good for heart, and should be consumed.
Freshly prepared jaggery increases Kapha and causes indigestion. 47-48.


Matsyandikadi – (brown sugar etc.):-

व ृ याः   ीण त हता र त प ता नलापहाः
म    यि डकाख ड सताः       मेण गुणव तमाः ४९

Matsyandika (brown sugar), Khanda (sugar candy) and Sita (white crystalline sugar) in their
succeeding order are better.They are aphrodisiac, good for the emaciated and the wounded, useful
in bleeding diseases and aggravation of Vata. 49.


          Page No. 59                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Yasa Sarkara :-

त गुणा त तमधुरा कषाया यासशकरा

Yasa Sarkara (sugar prepared from Yavasaka plant) is similar in properties to sugar but is bitter-
sweet and astringent in taste. 49½.

दाहत ृ   छ दमू छा ुि प त     यः सवशकराः

All types of sugars are useful in burning sensation, thirst, vomiting, fainting and bleeding
diseases. 50.

शकरे ु वकाराणां फा णतं च वरावरे ।

Among the products of sugarcane juice, sugar is the best and Phanita (half cooked molasses) is
the least. 50½.


Madhu – (honey) :-

च ु यं छे द त ृ   ले म वष ह मा    प तनुत ् ५१
मेहकु ठकृ म छ द वासकासा तसारिजत ्
 णशोधनस धानारोपणं वातलं मधु ५२
    ं कषाय मधुरं, त तु या मधुशकरा

Madhu (honey) is
Chakshushya – good for the eyes (vision),
Chedi – breaks up hard masses,
Trut – relieves thirst,
Shelshmahara – balances Kapha

Useful in
Visha – toxicity
Hidhma – hiccup
Asrapitta – bleeding conditions
Meha – diabetes, urinary tract diseases
Kushta – skin diseases
Krumi – worm infestation
Chardi – vomiting
Shwasa – dyspnoea, chronic respiratory diseases
Kasa – cough, cold
Atisara – diarrhoea
Vrana shodhana – cleanses wounds
Vrana sandhana, ropana – heals wound quickly
Vatala – increases Vata
Ruksha – dry
Kashaya, Madhura – astringent and sweet

          Page No. 60                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Crystallized honey – Madhu Sarkara is similar to honey in properties. 51-52½.

उ णमु णारमु णे स यु तं चो णै नहि त तत ् ॥ ५३ ॥

Honey, kills, if used after heating it, and by those suffering from great heat, used during hot
season, hot country or with hot foods. 53.

   छदने न हे च मधू णं न नवायते
अल धपाकमा वे व तयोय माि नवतते ५४
इती ुव गः

But honey does not cause any harm when used warm for producing vomiting or for
administration of Niruha (decoction enema) because it comes out of the body before it undergoes
digestion. 54.


Taila Varga – (group of oils and other fats) :-

तैलं   वयो नवत ् त    मु यं ती णं यवा य च
 व दोष त ् अजच ु यं सू मो णं कफकृ न च ५५
कृशानां बं ृहणायालं   थूलानां कशनाय च
ब व कं कृ म नं च सं कारात ् सवरोगिजत ् ५६

Oils are generally similar to their source (oil seed). Sesame oil is the most important among all
oils.

Sesame oil is
Tvak doshanut – cleanses and detoxifies skin
Chakshushya – good for eyes
Sukshma – pierces into deep tissues
Ushna – hot, balances Kapha
useful for both obese and emaciated people.
Useful to relieve constipation and worm infestation.
When it is processed with other herbs, it is very beneficial in various diseases.


Oil of Eranda – (Castor oil benefits) :-

स त तो णमैर डं तैलं       वाद ु सरं ग ु
व मगु मा नलकफानुदरं वषम वरम ् ५७
   शोफौ च कट गु यको ठप ृ ठा यौ जयेत ्
ती णो णं पि छलं व ं , र तैर डो वं व व त ५८


            Page No. 61                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Castor oil is bitter, pungent and sweet in taste,
Sara – promotes natural movement of body fluids (laxative),
Guru – hard to digest,

Useful in
Vardhma - enlargement of the scrotum (hernia),
Gulma – abdominal tumors,
Anila kaphahara – diseases caused by Vata and Kapha,
Udara – ascites
Vishama jwara – intermittent fevers,
pain and swellings of the waist, genitals, abdomen and back, is capable of penetrating deep, hot
in potency and bad in smell.
Oil of red variety of castor seeds is still more penetrating, hot in potency and sticky and has a bad
smell. 57 - 58.

Notes :- Castor oil is used for medicinal purpose to produce purgation to relieve pains and reduce
swelling etc. it is an efficient Vatahara drug (mitigates the increased Vata) and so very useful in
many diseases.


Sarshapa Taila – (mustard oil benefits) :

कटू णं साषपं ती णं कफशु ा नलापहम ्
लघु प ता कृत ् कोठकु ठाश णज तुिजत ् ५९

Sarsapa Taila – (mustard oil) is pungent, hot in potency, penetrating deep, mitigates (reduces)
Kapha, semen and Anila (Vata), easy to digest, causes bleeding diseases, rashes on the skin, skin
diseases, haemorrhoids, ulcers, and worms (bacteria etc).


Aksha Taila – (oil of Vibhitaka) :-

आ ं    वाद ु हमं के यं गु     प ता नलापहम ् ।

Aksa Taila – oil obtained from seeds of Vibhitaka is sweet, cold in potency good for the hair,
hard to digest, mitigates Pitta and Vata.


Nimbi Taila – (Neem oil) :-

ना यु णं न बजं त तं कृ मकु ठकफ णुत ् ॥ ६० ॥

Neem oil – is not very hot (slightly hot) in potency, bitter, anti microbial, useful in skin diseases
and mitigates Kapha. 60.


          Page No. 62                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Uma-Kusumbha Taila – (linseed oil and safflower oil) :-

उमा कुसु भजं चो णं व दोषकफ प तकृत ् ।

Taila of Uma (linseed) and Kusumbha are hot in potency, produce diseases of the skin, aggravate
Kapha and Pitta.


Vasa-Majja-Medas-(muscle-fat, marrow and fat) :-

वसा म जा च वात नौ बल प तकफ दौ ६१
मांसानुग व पौ च व या मेदो अ प ता वव

Vasa (muscle-fat) and Majja (bone-marrow) and fat mitigate Vata, cause increase of strength,
Pitta and Kapha and similar in properties with the meat of animals from which they are obtained.


Madya Varga – (group of wines) :-

द पनं रोचनं म यं ती णो णं तुि टपुि टदम ् ६२
स वाद ु त तकटुकम लपाकरसं सरम ्
सकषायं    वरारो य तभावणकृ लघु ६३
न ट न ा अ त न े यो हतं प ता दष
                             ू णम ्
कृश थूल हतं      ं सू मं   ोतो वशोधनम ् ६४
वात ले महरं यु    या पीतं वषवत ् अ यथा

Madya (wines, all alcoholic beverages generally) in general,
Deepana – stimulate digestion,
Rochana – help taste,
Teekshna – penetrate deep, Ushna – hot in potency,
Tushti pushtida – give satisfaction and nourishment
Sasvadu tikta katukam – slightly sweet, bitter and pungent in taste,
Amlapaka rasa – sour at taste and at the end of digestion,
Sara – laxative,
Sakashaya – slightly astringent,
Svara – confer good voice,
Arogya – improves health, Pratibha – talent, Varna – colour and complexion;
Laghu – easy to digest,

Beneficial to those having loss of sleep or excess sleep for both lean and stout persons; is non-
viscid, capable of entering through minute pores and cleansing them, mitigate Vata and Kapha,
all these if used judiciously; but used otherwise, they act like poison. 62-64½.

गु   त ोषजननं नवं , जीणमतो अ यथा ६५
पेयं नो णोपचारे ण न व र त ुधातुरैः

          Page No. 63                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ना यथती णम ृद ु अ पसंभारं कलुषं न च ६६

Fresh wine is hard to digest; increases of all the Doshas, whereas old ones decrease;

Contra indication for wines: Wine should not be consumed hot.
It should not be consumed by person undergoing Virechana (purgation) panchakarma therapy
It should be avoided by hungry person
Wines which are very strong or very weak, which are very clear (like water) or very turbid and
those which are spoilt, should not be used for drinking. 65-66.


Sura (beer) :-

गु मोदराश हणीशोष त ् ने हनी ग ु ः
सुरा अ नल नी मेदो अस ृ       त यमू कफावहा ६७

Sura is useful in abdominal tumors, enlargement of the abdomen, heamorrhoids, duodenal
diseases, is lubricating, hard to digest, mitigates Vata, causes increase of fat, blood, milk, urine
and Kapha. 67.

Notes :- Sura is prepared by fermenting a mixture of water, flour of rice, jaggery (treacle) etc.,
somewhat like the beer of the present day.


Vibhitaka Sura –

त गुणा वा णी        या लघु ती णा नहि त च
शल
 ू कासव म वास वब धा मानपीनसान ् ६८
ना तती मदा ल वी प या वैभीतक सुरा
 णे पा    वामये कु ठे न चा यथ व           यते ६९

Sura prepared from Vibhitaka is not very intoxicating, is easy to digest, good for health; not so
harmful, (as other wines) in wounds, anaemia, and leprosy and other skin diseases. 69.


Yava Sura :-

व टि भनी यवसुरा गुव           ा    दोषला ।

Sura prepared from Yava – Barley – Hordeum vulgare (barley) causes constipation, is difficult to
digest, non-unctous and aggravates all the three Doshas. 61½.


          Page No. 64                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Arista – (fermented decoctions) :-

यथो   यगुणो अ र टः सवम यगुणा धकः ७०
 हणीपा डुकु ठाशः शोफशोषोदर वरान ्
हि त गु मकृ म ल हः कषायकटुवातलः ७१

Arista (fermented decoctions) possess properties of the materials from which it is prepared, and
is more intoxicating of all alcoholic beverages; it is useful in disease of the duodenum, anaemia,
skin diseases, haemorrhoids, dropsy, enlargement of the abdomen, fever, abdominal tumors,
worms (intestinal parasites) and disorders of the spleen; is astringent, pungent and aggravates
Vata. 70-71.


Mardvika – (wine prepared from grapes) :-

मा वीकं लेखनं       यं ना यु णं मधुरं सरम ्
अ प प ता नलं पा डु मेहाशः कृ मनाशनम ्

Mardvika (wine prepared from grapes) is scraping, good to the heart, not very hot in potentcy,
sweet,
Sara – promotes natural movement of body fluids (laxative), causes slight increase of Pitta and
Anila (Vata), useful in anaemia, diabetes, hemorrhoids and worms (intestinal parasites). 72.


Kharjura – (wine prepared from dates) :-

अ माद पा तरगुणं खाजूरं वातलं गु

is inferior in properties than grapes, aggravates Vata, and hard for digestion. 73.


Sarkara – (wine prepared by using sugar) :-

शाकर: सुर भ:     वाद ु   यो ना तमदो लघु: ॥ ७३ ॥

Is sweet smelling, sweet in taste, good for the heart, not very intoxicating and easy to digest.

स ृ टमू शकृत ् वातो गौड: तपणद पन: ।

Gouda (prepared by using molasses/treacle) increases volume of urine, faeces and flatus, is
nourishing and increasing hunger. 73½.


          Page No. 65                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Sidhu – (wine of sugarcane juice) :-

वात प तकरः सीधुः        नेह ले म वकाराहा
मेदः शोफोदराश न त         प वरसो वरः

Sidhu (prepared from fermenting sugarcane juice) aggravates Vata and Pitta, decreases
lubrication and diseases of Kapha, obesity, dropsy, enlargement of the abdomen and
haemorrhoids; that prepared by cooking sugarcane juice is best. 74.


Madhvasva – (wine prepared from honey) :-

छे द म वासव ती णो मेहपीनसकासिजत ् ॥ ७५ ॥

Madhwasava (wine prepared from honey) breaks up hard masses (of Kapha etc), penetrates deep,
useful in diabetes, chronic nasal catarrh and cough. 75.


Sukta – (wine prepared from tubers) :-

र त प तकफो       लेद शु तं वातनुल ोमनम ्
भ ृशो णती ण      ा लं     यं     चकरं सरम ् ७६
द पनं श शर पश पा डु            कृ मनाशनम ्

Sukta (wine prepared from roots and tubers) increases the moisture of blood, Pitta and Kapha,
expels Vata in downward directions, very hot in potency, is penetrating, causes dryness, sour,
good to the heart, increases taste (appetite), is Sara – promotes bowel movements (laxative),
enhances hunger, is cold to touch, useful in anaemia, diseases of the eye and worms. 76.
Sukta prepared by using jaggery, sugarcane, honey and grapes are easy to digest in their
successive order.


Asava (fermented infusion) :-

गुडे ु म य मा वीक शु तं लघु यथो तरम ् ॥ ७७ ॥

Asava prepared by using tubers, roots, fruits etc, is similar to shukta.
शा डाक चासुतं चा यत ् काला लं रोचनं लघु ॥ ७८ ॥

Asava prepared by using Sandaki (balls of fried paddy mixed with spices, dried in sun and then
deep fried in oil) and by other material (such as oil-cakes etc) which have turned sour by lapse of
time are appetizers and easy to digest.


          Page No. 66                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Dhanyamla (prepared rice and such other grains) :-

धा या लं भे द ती णो णं प तकृ         पशशीतलम ्
     म लमहरं      यं द पनं बि तशल
                                ू नत
                                   ु ् ७९
श तमा थापने         यं लघु वातकफापहम ्
ए भरे व ग ण
          ु ैयु ते सौवीरकतष
                          ु ोदके ८०
कृ म     ोगग ु माशः पा डुरोग नबहणे
ते     माि वतुषै व या सतुषै च यवैः कृते ८१

Dhanyamla (liquor prepared by fermenting the water in which rice and such other grains, pulses
etc. have been slightly cooked or merely washed) is purgative, penetrating, hot in potency,
aggravates Pitta, cold to touch, relieves fatigue and exhaustion, increases appetite and hunger,
useful in pain of the urinary bladder, ideal for use as Asthapana (decoction enema), good to the
heart, easy to digest, balances Vata and Kapha.

Sauviraka and Tushodaka also possess similar properties, useful in worms, heart disease,
abdominal tumor, haemorrhoids and anemia. These are prepared from dehusked barley and and
barley-with-husk. 79-81.

Notes :- Shukta – Fermented gruel, Dhanyamla, Sauviraka, Tushodaka etc. were in use since
ancient times. But now a days beer, brandy etc. alcoholic beverages have replaced them.


Mutra Varga (group of urine) :-

मू ंगो अजा वम हषीगजा वो        खरो वम ्
प तलं          ती णो णं लवणानुरसं कटु ८२
कृ मशोफोदरानाह शूलपा डुकफा नलान ्
गु मा च वषि व कु ठाशा स जये लघु ८३

Urine of cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, elephant, horse, camel and donkey – these aggravate Pitta, are
non-unctous, penetrating deep, hot in potency, pungent with salt as its secondary taste and useful
in worms, dropsy, abdominal enlargement, flatulence, colic, anemia, aggravation of Kapha and
Vata, abdominal tumors, loss of taste, poisoning, leucoderma, skin diseases and piles, and are
easy to digest.


Thus ends the chapter – Dravadravya Vijnaniya, the fifth of Suthrasthana of Ashtang Hriday.


           Page No. 67                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan