Chapter 14 Dvividha Upakramaneeya
 व वधोप मणीय – Two Kinds of Treatment

We are discussing two main kinds of Ayurveda treatments. Any treatment can be broadly
classified either as stoutening / nourishing OR as emaciating. The 14th chapter of Ashtanga
Hrudaya Sutrasthana is called as Dvividha Upakramaneeya Adhyaya. Dvividha means 2 types.
Upakrama means treatment. Let us explore further.


Dvividha Upakarma- two kinds of therapy :-

उप       य य ह    व वा        वधैषोप मो मतः
एकः संतपण त         वतीया चापतपणाः १
बं ृहणो ल घन चे त त पयायावुदा तौ
बंहृ णं य बह
           ृ वाय ल घनं लाघवाय यत ् २
दे ह य

Because, that to be treated, the human body is of two types – Obese and lean, the treatment is
also of two kinds.

1. Santarpana- nourishing, enriching. It is also called as Brihmana (Stoutening, increasing
weight, imparting heaviness)

2. Apartarpana –depleting, cleansing. It is also called as Langhana (fasting, losing weight,
imparting lightness etc). 1-2

भवतः      ायो भौमाप मतर च ते

Generally, Brihmana treatment is dominant with Prithvi (Earth element) and ap (water element).
Langhana is dominant with the rest three elements (Fire, air and ether).

 नेहनं      णं कम    वे दनं   त भनं च यत ्
भूतानां तद प     वै या वतयं ना तवतते

Functions such as Snehana (oleation/ lubrication) and Rukshana – (imparting dryness),
Swedana- (sweating therapy, sudation, diaphoresis), Sthambhana- (withholding, obstructing)
are also of these two kinds- Brihmana and Langhana.
Snehana and Sthambhana can be categorized as Brihmana and
Rukshana and Swedana can be categorized as Langhana
Thus all functions are not apart from two .3-3 ½

Langhana therapy imparts lightness to the body. It makes the body thin and light. It is of two
types.


           Page No. 185                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
शोधनं शमनं चे त      वधा त ा प ल घनं

Shodhana – Purification procedures (Panchakarma) and
Shamana- palliative treatment. 4

यद रये ब हद षान ् प चधा शोधनं च यत ्
न हो वमनं काय शरोरे को अ        व ु तः

Shodhana treatment expels imbalanced Doshas out of the body forcibly.
It is of five kinds, viz
Niruha- decoction enema,
Vamana- emesis, vomiting therapy
Kaya reka- Virechana – purgation for the body
Shio reka – Shiro Virechana – nasya – purgation for the head, nasal instillation of medicines.
Asra-visruti – Raktamokshana – blood letting .5

न शोधय त य ेषान ् समानोद रय या प
समीकरो त वषमान ् शमनं त च स तधा
पाचनं द पनं    ु त ृ यायामातपमा ताः

Shamana – palliative treatment is that which does not expel the increased Doshas out of the
body, it does not increase the normal Dosha, but makes the abnormal- Doshas normal.
In short, Shamana treatment brings imbalanced Dosha to normalcy.


Shamana 7 types –
        Pachana – digestive, carminatives,
        Deepana – hunger producing, stomachic,
        Kshut – withstanding hunger, avoidance of food, fasting
        Trut – withstanding thirst/avoidance of water drinking, avoiding liquid food intake
        Vyayama- physical activity,
        Aatapa- exposure to sunlight and
        Maruta- exposure of breeze. 6-6 ½

बं ृहणं शमनं वेव वायोः प ता नल य च

Brimhana- stoutening therapy also is Shamana only because it alleviates/ mitigates both Vata
and Vata Pitta- combination. 7


         Page No. 186                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan


                                           Treatment


          Santarpana/Brihmana                                     Apatarpana/Langhana
              (Nourishning)                                            (Thinning)

      Sodhana (Expel out Dosha)                                         Shamana
      (Purification, Panchakarma)                             (Palliative, Dosha Balance)

     1.     Vamana (Therapeutic Vomiting, Emesis)      1.   Pachana (Digstive)
     2.     Virechana (purgation therapy)              2.   Deepana (Hunger Producing)
     3.     Niruha (decoction enema)                   3.   Kshut (Hunger tolerance)
     4.     Nasya (Nasal administration)               4.   Trut (Thirst tolerance)
     5.     Raktamokshana (Blood letting)              5.   Vyayama (exercise)
                                                       6.   Aatapa (Sun exposure)
                                                       7.   Maruta (Breeze exposure)


Persons requiring stoutening therapy - Brimhaneeya -

बं ृहये   या धभैष यम य      ीशोकक शतान ्
भारो वारः      त ीण    द ुबलवातलान ्
ग भणीसू तकाबालव ृ ा        ी मेअपरान प
मांस ीर सतास पमधुरि न धबि त भः
  व नश यासख
          ु ा य ग नान नव ृ तहषणैः

Brimhana- stoutening therapy should be given to persons who are
Vyadhi karshita – emaciated by diseases,
Bhaishajya Karshita – emaciated by medicines- therapies,
Madya Karshita – emaciated by alcohol
Stri Karshita – Emaciated by excess sexual activity
Shoka karshita – Emaciated by grief,
Bhara – who carries heavy loads frequently
Adhva – who has walked / travelled a long distance
Urakshata – person with chest injury
KShatakseena – who is debilitated due to injury
Ruksha – who has excess dryness
Durbala – debilitated

            Page No. 187                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Vatala – Person with Vata body type.
Garbhini – pregnant
Sutika –the women who has delivered,
Bala – children,
Vruddha – the aged and
Greeshme – in the month of summer, even the other people, who are not indicated above should
be given Nourishing therapy.


Method of Brihmana - ; by the use of meat, milk, sugar, ghee, enema prepared sweet substances
and fats(oil, ghee), sleep, comfortable bed, oil- massage, bath, comforts, rest and happiness of
the mind.
8-9 ½


Persons requiring thinning therapy – Langhaneeya –

मेहामदोषअ ति न ध वर उ            त भकुि ठनः १०
वसप व ध ल ह शरक ठा              रो गणः
 थूलां च ल घयेि न यं श शरे त ु अपरान प ११

Langana- thinning, slimming therapy should be doneto
Meha – diabetics
Amadosha – persons suffering from Ama
Atisnigdha –who has undergone excess oleation treatment
Jvara – fever
Urustambha – stiffness of the thighs,
Kushta – skin diseases
Visarpa – herpes,
Vidhradi – abscess,
Pleeha – diseases of spleen,
Shira, Kanta Akshi roga – head, throat, and eyes;
Sthula – Those are obese
Even to others during Shishira – winter, Langhana treatment should be done. 10-11


Indication for Langhana therapy by means of Shodhana (Panchakarma) –

त     संशोधनैः    थौ यबल प तकफा धकान ्
आमदोष वर छ रतीसार दामयैः
वब धगौरवो गार           लासा द भरातुरान ्
म य थौ या दकान ् ायः पूव पाचनद पनैः
ए भरे वामयैरातान ् ह न थौ यबला दकान ्
    ु त ृ णा न हैद षै   वातान ् म यबलै ढान ्
समीरणातपायासैः कमुता पबलैन रान ्


            Page No. 188                                          Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Patients with these diseases should be given Panchakarma treatment as the means for Langhana
therapy. - Those who are very obese, strong and having predominance of Pitta and Kapha, those
suffering from Amadosha, fever, vomiting, Diarrhoea , hearts diseases, constipation, feeling of
heaviness, excess of belching, nausea, etc.


Indication for Deepana, Pachana and then Shodhana (Panchakarma) -

Those who are moderately obese, medium in strength of the body and also of the diseases
mentioned, first by administration of digestives and hunger producing substances generally, later
with other purification therapies;


Indication for Shamana type of Langhana –

Those who are troubled by increased Doshas, who are of medium strength, with medium strength
disease, who are capable of withstanding strain by the control of hunger and thirst; those again of
poor strength- of the body and of disease by exposing them to breeze, sunlight and exercise. 12-
14 ½

न बं ृहयेत ् ल घनीयान ् बं ृहयां तु म ृद ु ल घयेत ् १५
यु     या वा दे श काला दबलत तान ् उपाचरे त ्

Those who are to be given Langhana- thinning therapy, should not be given Brimhana-
stoutening; those who are to be given Brimhana should be given mild Langhana, or both
Langhana and Brimhana together, simultaneously may be given depending upon the nature of
habitat, season, strength etc. 15


Benefits of Bruhmana therapy –

बं ृ हते   या बलं पुि ट तत ् सा यामयस यः

Brimhana therapy makes for strength, nourishment of the body, and cure of such diseases which
are curable by that therapy. 16


Benefits of Langhana Therapy -

 वमलेि      यता सग मलानां लाघवं        चः
     ु त ृ सहोदयः शु   दयो गारक ठता
 या धमादवमु साह त         ानाश च ल घते

Keenness and clarity of sense organs,
Expulsion of Malas- Doshas and wastes,
Feeling of lightness of the body,
Good taste perception,
Appearance of hunger and thirst together,
            Page No. 189                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Feeling of purity in the chest region (heart),
Clear belching and clear throat,
softening of the diseases- decreased severity,
increase of enthusiasm and
loss of stupor- laziness 16-17

अनपे    तमा ा दसे वते कु त तु ते
अ त थौ या दका याद न ्, व य ते ते च सौषधाः

These- therapies indulged into in great measure than required, lead on to profound obesity and
emaciation etc, which will be enumerated now, along with their treatment.18

 पं तैरेव च      ेयमा तबं ृ हतल घते


Ati Brimhana- excess of stoutening therapy :-

अ त थौ यापचीमेह वरोदरभग दरान ्
कासस     यासकृ      ामकु ठाद न तदा णान ्

Excess of Brimhana therapy produces
Atisthaulya – profound obesity
Apachi – scrofula,
Meha – Diabetes, UTI
Jvara – fever
Udara – enlargement of abdomen,
Bhagandara – fistula-in-ano,
Kasa – cough,
Sanyasa – loss of consciousness,
Mutrakruchra – Dysuria,
Ama- disorders of poor digestive activities,
Kushta -skin diseases which are very dreadful. 20


Treatment for over nourishing -

त   मेदो नल ले मनाशनं सव म यते
कुला थजूण यामाकयवमु गमधूदकम ्
म त ुद डाहता र ट च ताशोधनजागरम ्
मधुना    फलां ल या गुडूचीमभयां घनम ्
रसा जन य महतः प चमल
                  ू य ग ु गल
                           ु ोः
शलाजतु] योग च साि नम थरसो हतः
वड गं नागरं       ारः काललोहरजो मधु
यवामलक चूण च योगो अ त थौ यदोशिजत ्


          Page No. 190                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Treatments which reduce Medas- fat, Anila- Vata and Kapha are desirable;
Use of Kulattha – horse gram – Dolichos Biflorus,
Jurna, Shyamaka,
Yava – Barley – Hordeum Vulgare,
Mudga – green gram – Averrhoa Carambola, and Honey water;
Indulgence in worry, stressful activities
Purification therapies, avoidance of sleep,
either Triphala, Guduci, Abhaya –(Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind – Terminalia chebula) and
Musta (Cyperus rotundus), should be licked with honey daily;
Either Rasanjana (Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata), Brihat Pancamula (Agnimantha,
Shyonaka, Gambhari, Patala, Bilva), Guggulu – along with the fresh juice of Agnimnatha is
suitable;

Powder of Vidanga (False black pepper – Embelia ribes), Nagara – (Ginger), Kshara-
Yavakshara and iron filing or powder of Yava (Barley – Hordeum vulgare) and Amla along with
honey – should be licked daily. 21-24

 योषकटवीवरा श ु वड गा त वषाि थराः
ह गुस ौवचलाजाजीयवानीधा य च काः
नशी ब ृह यौ हपुषा पाठामूलं च के बुकात ्
एषां चूण मधु घ ृतं तैलं च सदशांशकम ्
स तु भः षोडशगुणैयु तं पीतं नहि त तत ्
अ त थौ या दकान ् सवा ोगान यां च त वधान ्
  ोगकामलाि व      वासकासगल हान ्
बु मेधा म ृ तकरं स न या ने च द पनम ्

Powder of Vyosha- (Trikatu – pepper, long pepper and ginger), Katvi, Vara (Triphala), Shigru
(drum stick), Vidanga (False black pepper – Embelia ribes), Ativisha, Sthira (Desmodium
gangeticum), Hingu – (Asa foetida), Sauvarcala, Ajaji – (Cuminum cyminum), Yavani –
(Trachyspermum ammi), Dhanya, Chitraka, the two Nisa (turmeric and tree turmeric), the two
Brihati(brihati and kantakari), Hapusa, root of Patha (Cyclea peltata) and of Kebuka, should be
mixed with honey, ghee and oil in equal proportion and sixteen parts of saktu (corn flour), this
mixture diseases- mentioned earlier and even others of similar nature such as heart diseases,
Jaundice, Leucoderma, Dyspnoea, cough, obstruction in the throat- hoarseness of voice etc.
improves powder of thinking, intelligence, memory and kindles the weakened fire- digestive
activity. 25-28


Atilanghana- excess of thinning therapy:-

अ तका य      मः कास त ृ णा ध यमरोचकः
 नेहाि न न ा      ो शु ौजः    ु   वर यः
बि त    मूधज घो      कपा व जा      वरः


         Page No. 191                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
 लापो वा नल ला न छ पवाि थभेदनम ्
वच मू      हा या च जाय ते अ त वल घनात ्

Profound emaciation,
Bhrama – Delusion, Dizziness,
Kasa – cough,
Trushna – severe thirst,
Aruchi – anorexia,
loss- decrease of moistness, and digestive power, of sleep, vision, hearing, semen, Ojas, hunger
and voice;
Pain in the urinary bladder, heart, head, calves, thighs, upper shoulders and flanks;
fever, delirium- excess of talk, belching, exhaustion, vomiting, cutting pain in the joints and
bones;
non-elimination of faeces, urine etc., arise from excess of Langhana 29-30

काशमेव वरं     थौ यात ् न ह    थूल य भेषजम ् ॥३१॥ बं ृहणं ल घनं वाऽलि तमेदोि नवातिजत ् ।

Emaciation is better than obesity, there is no treatment for the obese, for, neither Brimhana nor
Langhana are capable of vanquishing excess of fat, digestive activity and vata. 31

मधुर ि न ध सा ह यैय सौ येन च न य त
     शमा   थ वमाअ य त वपर त नषेव णैः
योजये बंहृ णं त   सव पाना नभेषजम ्

Emaciation gets cured by use of sweet and unctous- fatty foods and comfortable living, whereas
obesity gets cured by the use of the foods etc, of the opposites- qualities to the above that too
when used in maximum quantity. There, liquids, foods and drugs which are Brimhana should be
adopted 32-33


अ च या हषणेन        ुवं संतपणेन च
 व न स गाच कृशोवराह इव पु य त

The emaciated person becomes stout like a boar by absence of worry, by happiness, more use of
nutritious food and more of sleep. 34

न ह मांससमं कि चद यदे हब ृह वकृत ्
मांसादमांसं मांसेन स भ ृत वात ् वशेषतः ३५

There is nothing other than meat to stouten the body, especially so the meat of carnivorous
animals, for they feed on meat itself. 35

गु    चातपणं   थूले वपर तं हतं कृशो
यवगोधूममुभयो त यो या हतक पनम ्


           Page No. 192                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Foods which are heavy and non- nutrition are ideal for the obese whereas the opposites- are ideal
for the emaciated;
Yava – Barley – Hordeum vulgare- barley is heavy and non nutritious, ideal for obese and
Godhuma- wheat is light to digest and nutritious, Hence good for emaciated. 36

दोषग या अ त र य ते       ा हमे या दभे दतः
उप मा न ते      व वा     ना अ प गदा इव

Though the states of Doshas are innumerable and innumerable are the kinds of treatments such as
Grahi – withholding etc, still they do not surpass these two kinds- Brimhana and Langhana, just
as the diseases- though innumerable fall into two kinds only, viz Sama and Nirama. (with and
without Ama)


Thus ends the chapter named Dvividhopakrmaniya- the fourteenth of Sutrasthana of Astanga
Hrudaya


         Page No. 193                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan