Chapter 22 Gandushadi Vidhi ग डूषा द व ध- Gargles
and other therapies
Let us learn about few oral, ear and head therapy, their benefits, procedure etc. It is the
22nd Chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi
Simhagupta. The chapter is called as Gandushadi Vidhi Adhyaya, because it starts with
explanation of Gandusha – mouth gargling.


Types of Full volume mouth gargling – Gandusha Prakara –

Note: Gandusha is treatment procedure wherein the patient holds the liquid medicine in his
mouth, to its full, for specific time period.

चत ु     कारो ग डूषः ि न धः शमनशोधनौ
रोपण च      य त      षु यो या चला दषु १
अ यो       ण नः

Gandusha is of four kinds, viz –
Snigdha – lubricating, with oils and fats – for Vata imbalance disorder
Shamana – palliative – for Pitta imbalance disorder
Shodhana – purifying – for Kapha imbalance disorder
Ropana – healing. 2.


Snigdha Gandusha –

ि न धो अ        वा व ल पटुसा धतैः
 नेहैः

lubricating full mouth gargle is by the use of oil processed with herbs of sweet, sour and salt
tastes.


Shamana Gandusha –

संशमनः त तकषायमधुरौषधैः

palliative full mouth gargle is by herbs of bitter, astringent and sweet tastes.


            Page No. 268                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shodhana –

शोधनः त त कटु अमल पटू णैः

purifying full gargle is with herbs of bitter, pungent, sour, salt tastes and possessing Ushna – hot
property.


Ropana –

रोपणः पुनः
कषाय त तकैः

healing full gargle is with herbs of astringent and bitter. 3.


Gandusha Drava – liquids used –

त     नेहः     ीरं मधूदकम ्
शु तं म यं रसो मू ं धा या लं च यथायथम ्
क कैयु तं वप वं वा यथा पश           योजये त ् ४

Fats – oil, ghee etc., milk,
Honey with water
Shukta – fermented gruel,
Madya – wine,
Mamsarasa – juice of meat,
Mutra – urine of animals or
Dhanyamla – wash of grains fermented by keeping overnight,
These liquids are commonly used in Gandusha.
The liquids may be mixed with a kalka (herbal paste)
The liquids may be cooked or raw
The liquids should be comfortable to touch and to hold in the mouth.

Tilakalkodaka – Sesame seed paste with water –
In conditions like
Dantaharsha – tingling of the teeth,
Dantachala – shaky teeth, and
disease of the mouth caused by Vata, Gandusha with water mixed with sesame seed paste – either
lukewarm or cold, is useful. 5

Taila (sesame oil), Mamsarasa (meat soup), Ghrita (ghee) Ksheera (cow milk)

न यं तैलं मंसरसोअथवा

For daily use, either sesame oil or meat soup is good.


             Page No. 269                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ऊषादाहाि वते पाके     ते चाग त ुसंभवे
वषे    ाराि नद धे च स पधाय पयोअथवा

When there is local or general burning sensation (Daha), ulceration and wounds caused by
foreign bodies, poison wounds, alkalies (Kshara) and burns by fire, it is best to hold either ghee
or milk. 3 – 6.

वैश यं जनय त आशु स दधा त मुखे           णान ्
दाहत ृ णा शमनं मधु ग डूष धारणम ्

Honey - Holding honey in the mouth removes the sliminess of the mouth, heals the ulcers
quickly, relieves burning sensation and thirst. 7.

धा या लंआ यवैर य मलदौग           यनाशनम ्

Holding Dhanyamla – fermented grain wash in the mouth removes distaste, dirt (of teeth and
tongue) and bad smell from the mouth.

तदे वालवणं शीतं मुखशोषहरं परम ्

The same – Dhanyamla without salt, used cold, is best to remove dryness of the mouth.

आशु    ारा बु ग डूषो भनाि त शले मण चयम ्

Holding Ksharambu – water containing alkalies in the mouth quickly breaks up the
accumulation of Kapha.

सुखो णोदकग डूषैजायते व        लाघवम ्

Holding comfortable warm water brings about ightness and cleansing of the mouth. 8 – 9.


Gandusha Vidhi – procedure -

नवाते सातपे ि व न म ृ दत       क धक धरः १०
ग डूषम पबन ् कि जत ् उ नता यो वधारये त ्
ग डूषम पबि वधारयेत ्

The person should sit in a place devoid of breeze (Nivata) but in sunlight (Sa Aatapa).
His shoulders and neck should be massaged and fomented;
Keeping his face slightly lifted up,

कफपूणा यता याव        व   ाणा ताअथवा


          Page No. 270                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
he should hold the liquid in his mouth till the mouth gets filled with Kapha or till the nose and
eyes start secreting liquid. 10 – 11.


Difference betweek Kavala and Gandusha –

अस जाय मुखे पूण ग डूषः, कवलो अ यथा

Filling the mouth with liquids fully not permitting any movement inside is Gandusha.
Taking liquid into mouth and moving it around by gargling for specific time period is Kavala.


Kavala – mouth gargles –

म या शरः कणमुखा        रोगाः    से क क ठामयव      शोषाः १२
 ु लासत    ा च पीनसा च सा या वषेशा कवल हण

Diseases of the neck, head, ears, mouth and eyes,
Praseka – excess salivation, diseases of the throat,
dryness of the mouth, nausea,
Tandra – stupor,
Aruchi – anorexia and
Peenasa – rhinitis are curable by Kavala – mouth gargles. 12.


Pratisarana – coating the mouth with herbs -

क को रस      या चूणः      वधं    तसारणम ्
यु   यात ् तत ् कफरोगेषु ग डूष व हतौषधैः १३

Pratisarana – applying herbs to the interior of the mouth with the finger – is of three kinds, viz.
Kalka – in the form of paste
Rasakriya – solidified decoction and
Curna – powder
It should be done in diseases of Kapha origin with the same herbs as suggested for Gandusha. 13.


Mukhalepa – application of paste of herbs over the face, Facial creams

मुखलेपः    धा दोष वषहा वणकृ च सः १४

Mukhalepa – application of paste of herbs over the face is of three types –
Doshaha – removing the Doshas,
Vishaha – removing poison and
Varnakara – improving complexion. 14.

उ णा वातकफे श तः, शेषेषु अ यथशीतलः

          Page No. 271                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
It should be applied warm for Vata and Kapha and
For Pitta imbalance, it should be cold
Its three thickness –

   माणः चत ुभाग       भागा ा गुल ो ना तः

Minimum – 1/4th Angula (Finger breadth)
Medium – 1/3 Angula
Maximum – ½ Angula thickness 15.

अशु क य ि थ त त य, शु को द ू य त छ वम ्
तं आ य वा अपनये त ् तद ते अ य ग आचरे त ्

It should be allowed to remain till it becomes dry; when dry, it vitiates the skin colour, hence it
should be removed soon after it becomes dry. While removing, it should be moistened for easy
removal.
After removal, a gentle oil massage should be given. 16.


Things not to do –

ववजयेि दवा व नाभा या        यातप शुक्      ु धः

The person should avoid day sleep, speaking for long hours, exposure to fire and sunlight, sorrow
and anger during the procedure.


Contra indication - It should not be administered to persons suffering from

न यो यः पीनसे      अजीणद तन ये हनु हे
अरोचके जाग रते
Peenasa – rhinitis,
Ajeerna – indigestion,
Nasya – who have received Nasya therapy,
Hanugraha – locked jaw,
Aruchi – anorexia
Jagarana – loss of sleep.


Benefits –

स तु हि त सुयोिजतः
अकालप लत वय ग वल त मर नी लकाः

If properly done, it cures
Akalapalita – premature graying of hair,
Vyanga – discolored patch on face
          Page No. 272                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Vali – wrinkles,
Timira – blindness and
Neelika – bluish vision (a type of blindness) 17 – 18.

The following six recipes are ideal for the six seasons commencing with Hemanta –(early
winger) respectively.
1.   For Hemanta (early winter) – कोलम जा व ृषा मूलं शाबरं गौरसषपाः Marrow of Kola, root
     of Vrisha (Vasa – Adhatoda vasica) , Sabara and Gaurasarsapa (White mustard).
2.   For Shishira (winter) – संह मूलं तलाः कृ णा दाव व न तुषा यवाः Root of Simhi,
     Krisna tila (black sesame), bark of Darvi and Dehusked Yava (barley).
3.   For Vasantha (Spring) – दभमूल हमोशीर शर ष म शत डुल ाः Root of Darbha, Hima;
     Usheera, Shirisha, Mishi and Tandula (rice grains)
4.   For Greeshma (summer) – कुमुदो पलक हारद ुवामधुकच दनम ् Kumuda, Utpala, Kalhara,
     Durva, Madhuka and Chandana (Sandalwood).
5.   Varsha (Rainy season) – काल यक तलोशीरमांसीतगरप कम ् Kaliyaka, Tila, Usira, Mamsi,
     Tagara and Padmaka.
6.   Sharath (Autumn) – ताल सगु ापु       ा वय ट काशानतागु Talisa, Gundra, Pundrahva, Yasti,
     Kasa, Nata and Aguru. 19 – 21.

इ य ा    दता लेपा हे म ता दषु ष      म ृताः
मुखालेपनशीलानां    ढम ् भव त दशनम ्
वदनं चाप र लानं ल णं तामरसोपमम ्

For those who are habituated to application of paste of herbs on the face, the vision becomes
keen, the face never dull, but smooth and brilliant resembling a lotus flower. 22.


Murdha Taila – Oil treatment of the head –

अ य ग सेक पचवो बि त चे त चतु वधम ् २३
मध
 ू तैलम ् बहुगण
              ु ं त व यात ् उ तरो तरम ्

Murdha Taila – application of oil to the head is of 4 types.
Shiro Abhyanga – smearing oil and mild massage,
Shiro Pariseka– pouring oil in continuous stream,
Shiro Pichu – keeping cloth soaked in oil over the entire area of scalp
Shiro Basti – making the oil stand on the head with the help of a compound.
Each successive one being more effective. Means, Shirobasti is the most effective among the
four.

Shiro Abhyanga –

त ा य गः     यो त यो रौ य क डू मला दषु

applying oil and doing mild massage should be used in cases of dryness, itching and dirtyness.

         Page No. 273                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pariseka –

अ ं षका शर तोद दाहपाक णेषु तु
प रषेकः

pouring oil in a thin stream is useful in ulcerations of the scalp, headache, burning sensation,
wounds, and suppurations in the scalp. It is also known as Shirodhara.


Shiro Pichu –

पचुः केशशात      फुटन धूपने

oil soaked cloth / cotton swabs, applied over the scalp – useful in case of falling of hairs, cracking
of the skin and feeling of burning sensation.


Shirobasti –

ने   त भे च बि त तु        सुि त अ दतजागरे
नासा यशोषे त मरे शरोरोगे च दा णे

making the oil to stand on the head in cases of
Netrasthamba – lack of movement of eyeball
Prasupti – loss of sensation of the scalp,
Ardita – facial palsy,
Jagara – loss of sleep,
Nasa Asya Shosha – dryness of the nose and mouth,
Timira – blindness and
Daruna Shiroroga – dreadful diseases of the head. 23 – 26.


Shirobasti Vidhi -

व ध त य नष ण यपीठे जानुसमे म ृदौ
शु ा ति व नदे ह य दना ते ग यमा हषम ्
 वादशा गुल व तीण चमप ं शरः
आकणब धन थानं ललाटे व             वेि टते
चैलवे णकया ब ा माषक केन लेपये त ्
ततो यथा या ध       ुतं   ने हं को णं नषेचये त ्
ऊ व केशभुवो यावद गुलं धारयेचच तम ्
आव     ना सको     लेदा शा टौ ष      चला दषु


          Page No. 274                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
मा ासह ा य जे वे कं       क धा द मदये त ्
मु त नेह य परमं स ताहं त य सेवनम ्

The person who has been purified – with Vamana, Virechana etc., should be gently massaged
with oil and given mild fomentation.

Then at the closing of the day (evening) he should be made to sit on a stool of the height of the
knee, a strap of leather made from the leather of either cow or buffalo, twelve Angula in width ( 8
– 9 inches) and equal to that of the head in circumference should be wrapped around the head,
just above the ears, covered by a piece of cloth over the forehead, and fastened tight with a
thread.

The joints and intervening spaces should be packed with paste of black gram flour in order to
prevent leakage of oil. Then, medicated oil prescribed for the disease, should be poured over the
head, in luke warm condition, to a height of one Angula over the skin of the scalp.


Maatrakala/ time for holding the medicine

आव     ना सको     लेदा शा टौ ष     चला दषु
मा ासह ा य जे वे कं

It should be held till secretion of fluid appears in the mouth and nose, or for a period of
10,000 Matra Kala for Vata
8,000 Matra Kala for Pitta and
6,000 Matra Kala for Kapha
1 Matra Kala = time required to blink the eye once.
For a healthy person, it is 1,000 Matra Kala.


Anantara kriya

 क धा द मदये त ्
मु त नेह य परमं स ताहं त य सेवनम ्

After this period, the shoulders etc. should be massaged, after removing the oil over the head.
Seven days shall be the maximum period for this therapy. 27-31.


Karna Purana – filling the ears with oil –

धारये पूण कण कणमूलं वमदयन ्
 जः    या मादवं याव मा ाशतमवे दने ३२

The ears should be filled with medicated fat/oil, root of the ears massaged, till the pain or the
disease subsides and for a period of one thousand Matra Kala in case of healthy persons. 32.


          Page No. 275                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Matra Kala –

याव पय त ह ता ं द       णं जानुम डलम ्
नमेषो मेषकालेन समं मा ा तु सा         मत
                                       ृ ा

The time required for the finger of the right hand to move around the right knee once or the time
required for closing and opening of the eyelids once is defined as a Matrakala. 33.


Murdhataila Phala – benefits of oiling of the head –

कचसदना सततव पि जर वं प रफुट शरसः समीररोगान ्
जय त जनय त इि        य सादं    वरहनुमू बलं च मू तैलम ्

Oiling of the head prevents/cures falling, graying and matting of the hair, cracking of skin of the
scalp, diseases of the head of Vata imbalance, produces clarity of sense organs, imparts strength
to the voice, jaw and head. 34.


Thus ends the chapter Gandushadi Vidhi – the 22nd in Sutrasthana of Astanga Hridaya


          Page No. 276                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan