Chapter 8 मा ा शतीय अ याय Food habits &
Indigestion
The 8th chapter is called as Matrashiteeya Adhyaya. It includes – right quantity of food to take,
right time to take food, types of indigestion and their treatment, qualities and types of after
drinks, right method of food intake etc.


Right Amount of Food – Aharamatra Apeksha:

मा ाशी सवकालं      या मा ा ह अ नेः       व तका
मा ां   या यपे     ते गु    या प लघू या प १
गु णामधसौ ह यं लघूनां ना तत ृ तता
मा ा माणं न द टं सुखं यावत ् वजीय त २

One should always consume proper quantity of food. Right amount of food activates Agni –
digestion power (which is compared to fire, in Ayurveda).
Food that are light to digest (laghu) and those that are hard to digest (Guru) both require a
specified quantity for proper digestion.
As a general rule, if the food is heavy to digest (such as oily food, non veg, sweets etc), it should
be consumed till half of the satiation level is achieved. (Ardha Sauhitya).
If the food is light to digest, it should be consumed till one is not overly satiated. (Na Ati
Truptata).
The right amount of food is that, which undergoes digestion easily.


Effect of taking more or less amount of quantity of food –

भोजनं ह नमा ं त ु न बलोपचयौजसे
सवषां वातरोगाणां हे तुतां    प यते ३
अ तमा ं पुनः सवानाशु दोषान ् कोपयेत ्

Consuming less quantity of food does not increase strength, ojus (immunity). The body will not
be nourished properly. Over a period of time, it leads to Vata imbalance disorders. Excess
quantity of food is again not desirable. It causes quick increase of Doshas. 3 – 3½.


Effects of over eating:

पी यमानो ह वाता या युगप तेन को पताः ४
आमेना नेन द ु टे न तदे वा व य कुवते
व ट भय तो अलसकं             यावय तो वसू चकाम ् ५
अधरो तरमागा यां सहसैवािजता मनः
          Page No. 115                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Due to eating excess quantity of food, Vata and other Doshas suddenly get increased together and
associating with the undigested and vitiated food (Ama) , produce diseases.
It causes Alasaka disease by blocking the movement of food inside the alimentary tract and
Visuchika (gastro enteritis) by expelling out the undigested food in both downward and upward
directions (diarrhoea and vomiting) simultaneously.
This is seen in persons who are not self controlled and who can not control their craze for eating.
4-5.


Alasaka – indigestion + constipation:

 या त नो व नाध तादाहारो न च प यते ६
आमाशये अलसीभत
            ू तेन सो अलसकः               मत
                                          ृ ः

Food neither comes out in the upper route by vomiting nor from the downward route by
purgation. Nor does it undergo digestion in the stomach. It stays in the stomach lazily (=Alasya).
Such a disease condition is called as Alasaka. 6.


Visuchika ~ Gastro enteritis

व वधैः वेदनो े दैवा वा द भश
                          ृ कोपतः ७
सू च भ रव गा ा ण व यती त वसू चका

Due to sudden and profound aggravation Vata, along with other Doshas, the person experiences
pain in entire body, as though being pricked by needles, hence this disease is called Visuchika.
(Suchi means needle).


Influence of different Doshas in Alasaka and Visuchika -

त   शूल मानाहक प त भादयो अ नलात ् ८
प तात ् वरा तसारा तदाहत ृ      लयादयः
कफा छ य गगु तावा स ग ठ वनादयः ९

In Alasaka and Visuchika,
If Vata is aggravated, it causes
Shoola – adominal pain
Bhrama – Delusion
Anaha – bloating, fullness
Kampa – tremors
Stambha – stiffness etc symptoms.
If Pitta is aggravated, it causes
Jvara – fever
Atisara – diarrhoea, dysentery
Antardaha – internal burning sensation


         Page No. 116                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Trut – excessive thirst
Pralaya – panic, unconsciousness
If Kapha is aggravated, it causes
Chardi – Vomiting
Angaguruta - heaviness of the body
Vak Sangha – Difficulty to speak
Shteevana – excessive salivation, expectoration and spitting


Manifestation of Alasaka symptoms:

वशेषा द ुबल या पव ने वग वधा रणः
पी डतं मा तेना नं शले मणा        म तरा १०
अलसं    ो भतं दोषैः श य वेनैव संि थतम ्
शूलाद न ् कु ते ती ां छ अतीसारविजतान ् ११
सो अलसः

Alasaka occurs especially in those who are weak, who have low digestion strength and who
suppress urges of the body, habitually. In them, Vata gets increased, gets associated with Kapha
to obstruct the movement of undigested food in the digestive tract. It causes the food to stay
inside the stomach, as a foreign body. It leads to abdominal colic and such other symptoms, but
without vomiting and diarrhea. 10 – 11.


Dandalasaka –

अ यथद ु टा तु दोषा द ु टा भब खाः
या तः तय तनुं सवा द डवत ् त भयि त चेत ् १२
द डकालसकं नाम तं ये जेदाषुका रणम ्

Highly vitiated Doshas, move into vitiated and obstructed channels by accumulation of
undigested food. Thus Doshas get obstructed in the GI tract, and begin to move in other unnatural
channels. Thus Doshas spread throughout the body and make it stiff like a log of wood. This
disease is called Dandakalasaka, which should be rejected for treatment as it is quick in causing
death. 12.


Ama Dosha

व      अ यशनाजीणशी लनो वषल णम ् १३
आमदोषं महाघोरं वजये वषसं कम ्
वष पाशुका र वात ् व      ोप म वतः १४

Persons who indulges in
Viruddha Ashana – taking incompatible foods,

         Page No. 117                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Adhyashana – taking excess food
Ajeerna Ashana – Eating over undigested food,
develops the dreaded Amadosa which is similar to poison. Hence it is also called as Amavisha
(undigested food poison).
Such a person should be refused for treatment because of its similarity with poison, quickness in
causing death and requiring treatments of opposite nature to one another Doshas and qualities. 13
– 14.


Treatment of Alasak


अथ आमं अलसीभूतं सा यं तव रतमुि लखेत ्
पी वा सो ापटुफलं वायु णं योजये ततः १५
 वेदनं फलव त च मलवातानुलोमनीम ्
ना यमाना न चा गा न भश
                    ृ ं ि व ना न १६ वे टये त ्

Ama – undigested food stagnating inside the Gastro intestinal tract should be removed quickly
after deciding the conditions of easy management.
The person is made to drink warm water mixed with powder of Ugra (Vacha – Acorus calamus),
Patu (Saindhava – Black Salt) and Phala (Madanaphala); This will cause vomiting;
This therapy is followed up with Swedana (sudation therapy)
Next, Phalavarti (rectal suppositories) prepared from fruits which help downward movement of
feaces and flatus should be administered,
The parts of the body which are rigid should be well fomented and then wrapped with cloth. 15 –
16.


Treatment of Vishucika

वसू यां अ तव ृ ायां पा य ः दाहः     श यते
तद   चोपवा यैनं व र तवत ् उपाचरे त ् १७

In advanced stage of Visucika, branding by fire over the heel, is recommended. The patient
should be made to fast on that day and taken care of as the one who has undergone purgation
therapy. All the post Virechana procedure and treatment should be given to the patient. 17.


Aama Dosha Chikitsa

ती ा तर प नाजीण      पबे त ् शूल नं औषधम ्
आमस नो अनलो नालं प तुं दोषौषधाशनम ् 18
नह याद प चेतषां व मः सहसाआतुरम ्

The patient of indigestion though having severe abdominal pain should not take pain killing
drugs; the Agni – digestive fire which is associated with Ama – improperly processed metabolites


         Page No. 118                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
will not be able to digest the Doshas, drugs and food; the severe troubles arising from these three
will soon kill the patient. 18.

जीणाशने तु भेष यं यु     यात ् त धगु दरे
दोषशेष य पाकाथम नः स धु णाय च

After the food is found digested, if stiffness and heaviness of the abdomen persisting, then the
medicines should be given to digest the residue Doshas and to stimulate the Agni – digestive
power. 19.

शाि तराम वकाराणां भव त तु अपतपणात ्
   वधं    वधे दोषे त समी य       योजये त ्

Diseases produced by Ama – undigested food, become relieved by Apatarpana (non-
nourishment); three kinds of Apatarpana, appropriate to the three Doshas should be adopted after
careful consideration of all aspects. 20.

त ा पे ल घनं प यं , म ये ल घन पाचनम ्
 भूते शोधनं, त     मूलाद ु मूलये मलान ्

If Ama is little, only Langhana (fasting) will be suitable,
If it is moderate Langhana (fasting) and Pachana – digestive drugs are needed;
if it is severe, then Shodhana (purification Panchakarma therapy) is necessary; for these will
expel out the Dosha and Ama from the very root. 21.


Treatment principle for diseases

Even the other diseases should be treated by adopting treatments which are opposite of their
causative factors. It is called as Hetu Viparyaya Chikitsa. Hetu means causative factors. If,
however, the diseases reoccur or persist for long time then the Hetu Viparyaya should be given
up and disease specific treatment should be adopted. It is called as Vyadhi Viparyaya Chikitsa.

तदथकार वा, प वे दोषे ि व े च पावके
हतम य जन नेहपानब          या द युि ततः

Or Tadarthakari Chikitsa (therapies which, though not actually opposite of either the cause or the
diseases still produce the desired result) should be adopted;
When the Doshas have returned to normal, when the Ama is completely relieved, when digestion
activity is completely restored to normalcy, then oil-bath, drinking of oil (oleation therapies) and
enema therapy, etc. should be administered appropriately. To gain the lost strength in the patient.
 22-24.


          Page No. 119                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Ajirna Bheda – different kinds of indigestion –

अजीण च कफादाम त           शोफो अ     ग डयोः
स योभु त इवो गारः        सेको   लेशगौरवम ् 25

Vitiation of Kapha causes ”Ama Ajeerna” It is characterized with swelling of the eyes socket
and cheeks, belching similar to those which come up immediately after meals, excess salivation,
nausea and heaviness of the body. 25

व ट धं अ नलात ् शूल वब ध आ मानसादकृत ्

Vishthabdha ajirna - this type of indigestion is caused due to vitiated Vata and is characterized
by pain in the abdomen, constipation, flatulence and debility.

प तात ् वद धं त ृ मोह मा लो गारदाहवत ्

Vidagdha ajirna - this type of indigestion is due to vitiated Pitta and has thirst, fainting,
dizziness, giddiness, sour belching and burning sensation as its symptoms. 26


Ajirna Chikitsa - Treatment of Indigestion

ल घनं कायमामे त ु, व ट धे        वेदनं भ ृशम ्
वद धे वमनं , य वा यथाव थं हतं भवेत ् २७

For Ama ajirna, Langhana – fasting should be done;|
For Vishtabdha Ajirna, Swedana (sudation therapy) should be done;
For Vidagdha ajirna, Vamana (emesis therapy) should be done, or any therapy appropriate to the
stage of the disease can be done. 27


Vilambika disease:

गर यसो भवे ल नादामादे व वलि बका
कफवातानुब ा आम ल गा त समसाधना 28

Vilambika – another kind of indigestion occurs due to profound accumulation of Ama inside the
channels. It is caused due to vitiation of Kapha and Vata, and has all the symptoms of Ama; its
treatment also is similar to that of Ama. 28


          Page No. 120                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Rasashesha Ajeerna -another type of indigestion

अ     ा   दय यथा शु ेअ प उ गारे रसशेषतः
शयीत कि चदे वा      सव चाना शतो दवा २९
 व यादजीण , स जातबुभु ो अ याि मतं लघु

Rasashesha ajeerna - Lack of enthusiasm, discomfort in the region of the heart in spite of pure
belching are the features of Rasashesha ajirna – another kind of indigestion. Such a person should
sleep for some time during day without eating anything.
Patient of indigestion of any type should sleep during day without taking any food, later, when he
develops hunger he should eat little quantity of easily digestible food. 28½ – 29


Ajirna Samanya Laksana – general symptoms of indigestion:-

वब धोअ त व ृि तवा ला नमा तमूढता ३०
अजीण ल गं सामा यं व ट भो गौरवं           मः

Diarrhea or constipation, exhaustion, inactivity of Vata, distension of the abdomen, feeling of
heaviness and dizziness are the general symptoms of Ajirna (indigestion). 30


Ajirna Anyakaranani – other causes of indigestion

न चा तमा मेवा नमामदोषाय केवलम ्
    व ट वि टि भद धामगु        हमाशु च
वदा ह शु कम य बु लत
                  ु ं चा नं न जीय त
उपत तेन भु तं च शोक ोध ुदा द भः

Consuming large quantity of food is not the only cause for production of Ama Dosha; foods
which are disliked, which cause flatulence, which are over-cooked or uncooked, which are not
easily digestible, which are dry, very cold, dirty (contaminated), which cause burning sensation
during digestion, which are dried up or soaked in more water, do not undergo proper digestion; so
also the food consumed by persons afflicted with grief, anger, excess hunger etc. 31- 32½


Dushta Ashana – bad food habits:

म ं प यमप यं च भु तं समशनं मतम ्
व याद यशनं भूयोभु त योप र भोजनम ्
अकाले बहु चा पं वा भु तं तु वषमाशनम ्
 ी य येता न म ृ युं वा घोरान ् याधी स ृजि त वा


          Page No. 121                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Consuming suitable and unsuitable foods mixed together is known as Samashana,

Consuming large quantity of food even before the previous meal is digested constitutes
Adhyasana,

Consuming less or more quantity at improper time is Vishamashana,

- all these three either cause death or dreaded diseases. 33 – 34


Ahara vidhi – regimen of diet –

काले सा    यं शु च हतं ि न धो णं लघु त मनाः
ष सं मधुर ायं ना त ुत वलि भतम ्
 नातः     ु ान ् व व त थो धौतपादकराननः
तप य वा पतन ् दे वान तथीन ् बालकान ् गु न ्
  यवे य तर च अ प          तप नप र हान ्
समी य स यगा म नभ न द नभुवन ् वम ्
इ ट म टैः सहा ीया छु चभ तजना तम ्

Kale Satmyam - Food should be consumed at the proper time,
Shuchi Hitam – it should be the accustomed, clean, suited to health,
Snigdha, Ushna, Laghu – unctuous, hot and easily digestible;
Tanmanaa – consuming food with due attention
Shadrasa, Madhurapraayam – should contain all the six tastes with predominance of sweet taste,
Na Atidruta, Vilambitam – partaken neither very quickly nor very slowly;
Snataha – after taking bath,
Kshut vaan – after having good hunger,
Viviktastha -sitting in solitude,
Dhauta Pada kara aananaha – after washing the feet, hands and face,
Tarpayitva pitrun, Devan, Atitheen, Balakaan, Guroon – after satisfying the Pitrus (manes), gods,
guests, children and Guru.
After satisfying even the dependents maintained in the house (such as servants, horses and other
animals for receiving service, parrots and other pets etc.), after carefully considering one’s own
constitution, likes and dislikes,
without scolding / abusing the food, without too much of talk;
should partake more of liquid food, that which is liked,
in the company of the liked persons, and served by those who are clean and faithful to him. 35 –
38

भोजनं त ृणकेषा दजु टमु णीकृतं पुनः
शाकावरा नभू य ठम यु णलवणं यजेत ्

Food which is contaminated with grass, hairs etc; re-heated, which consists more of vegetables
and undesirable grains, which is very hot and very salty should be rejected. 39


          Page No. 122                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Food that should not be consumed habitually -

कलाटद धकूचीका ारशु ताममूलकम ्
कृशशु कवराहा वगोम     यभ हषा मषम ्
माष न पावशालूक वस प टवी ढकम ्
शु कशाका न यवकान ् फा णतं च न शीलयेत ्

Kilata (dairy product – sweet in taste),
Dadhi – Curds,
Kuchika (solid part of curds),
Kshara (alkalies),
Sukta (fermented gruel),
Ama Mulaka – Uncooked radish,
Meat of animals which are emaciated,
dry meat,
meat of the boar, sheep, cow, fish and buffalo,
Masha (black gram), Nishpava; Saluka, Bisa, Pista (powdery, starchy),
germinated grains, dried vegetables, Yavaka (small barley),
Phanita (half cooked molasses) – those should not be consumed habitually. 40 – 41.


Pathya – food that can be consumed habitually (on daily basis, for a long time) –

शीलये छा लगोधूमयवषि टकजा गलम ्
सु नष णकजीव तीबालमूलवा तुकम ्
प यामलकम ृ वीकापटोल मु गशकराः
घत
 ृ द योदक ीर ौ दा डमसै धवम ्

Shali (rice),
Godhuma (wheat),
Yava – Barley – Hordeum vulgare,
Shashtika (rice maturing in sixty days),
Jangala (meat of animals of desert like lands),
sunisannaka, Jivanti – Leptadenia reticulata,
Balamulaka (young radish),
Pathya (Haritaki)
Amalaka (Amla – Indian gooseberry),
Mridwika – dry grapes,
Mudga – green gram,
Sarkara (sugar),
Ghrita (ghee),
Divyodaka (rain water or pure water),
Ksheera (milk),
Kshoudra (honey),
Dadima – Pomegranate - Punica granatum
and Saindhava – Rock Salt (salt) can be consumed habitually. 42 – 43.


         Page No. 123                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
  फलां मधुस प या न श ने बलाय च
 वा    यानव
          ु िृ तकृ य च रोगो छे दकरं च यत ्

Triphala along with honey and ghee should be consumed at nights daily for strengthening of eye
sight.
Any other thing which is good for promoting/maintaining health and dispelling diseases can also
be consumed habitually. 43½.


Food that should be consumed at the beginning of meal –

बसे ुमोचचोचा मोदको का रका दकम ्
अ या    यं ग ु     ि न धं    वाद ु म दं ि थरं पुरः
वपर तमत चा ते म ये अ ललवणोतकटम ्

Foods which are not easily digestible, which are unctuous – fatty, sweet, slow and hard such as
Bisa, Ikshu (sugarcane), Mocha, Coca, Amra (mango), Modaka (sweet meat ball), Utkarika
(sweet dish) etc., should be consumed at the commencement of the meal. foods of opposite
qualities, at the end of the meal, and those which are predominantly sour and salt, in the middle
of the meal. 45 – 45½.

अ नेन कु         वाशौ पानेनैकं    पूरये त ्
आ यं पवनाद नां चतथ
                 ु मवशे षयेत ्

Two parts of the stomach (half of its capacity) should be filled with solid foods, one part by
liquids and the remaining one part should be kept vacant for accommodating air etc. 46


Anupana – (after – drink) :-

अनुपानं हमं वा र यवगोधूमयो हतम ्
दि न म ये वषे          ौ े को णं प टमयेषु तु
शाकमु गा द वकृतौ म तुत ा लकाि जकम ्
सुरा कृशानां पु     याथ, थूलानां टु मधूदकम ्
शोषे मांसरसो, म यं मांसे         व पे च पावके
 या यौषधा वभा य             ील घनातपकम भः
  ीणे व ृ े च बाले च पयः प यं यथा अम ृतम ्

Cold water is the ideal after-drink (Anupana) – after meals containing/ prepared from Yava –
(Barley) and Godhuma – wheat, after consuming Dadhi – Curds / yoghurt, wine, poison and
honey.


          Page No. 124                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Warm water is ideal after-drink for
foods which are starchy,
Mastu – Supernatent liquid of curds (whey),
Takra (diluted buttermilk)
Amla kanjika (fermented gruel);
dishes prepared from vegetables and Mudga (green gram) and other legumes :

Sura (beer) is the ideal after drink for lean person.
Honey mixed water is the ideal after drink for obese person.
Meat soup is good after drink for the emaciated,
Wines are ideal after a meal of meat and to those who have poor digestive capacity;
Milk is best suited just as nector for those who are debilitated by diseases, medicines (and
therapies), walking long distances, speaking, sexual intercourse, fasting, exposure to sun and such
other tiresome activities; for the emaciated, the aged, and children. 47 – 50.


An ideal Anupana

वपर तं यद न य गुणैः       याद वरो ध च
अनप
  ु ानं समासेन , सवदा त      श यते

An ideal Anupana ( after-drink) is that which has properties opposite of those of the foods but
not incompatible with them; such an after- drink is always valuable. 51.


Benefits of Anupana:

अनुपानं करो यूजा त ृि तं याि तं     ढा गताम ्
अ नस घातशै थ य वि लि तजरणा न च

Anupana – after – drink invigorates, gives contentment, helps proper movement of food inside,
stability of the body parts; loosening of hard masses of food, their proper liquification
(moistening) and digestion. 52.


Contra indication for Anupana –

नो वज ुगद वासकासोरः        तपीनसे
गीतभा य       गे च   वरभे दे च त    तम ्

It is not good in diseases of the organs above the shoulders (ear, nose, throat, eyes and brain
related diseases), dyspnoea (COPD, Asthma), cough, injury to chest (lungs), rhinitis, for those
engaged in singing and speaking and in hoarseness of voice. 53.

 ि ल नदे हमेहा    गलरोग णातुराः
पानं यजेयुः


          Page No. 125                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Drinking liquids should be avoided by those who are over-hydrated, who are suffering from
polyuria, diseases of the eyes and throat, and wounds (ulcers). 54.
All persons – both healthy and sick should avoid speaking, walking long distances and sleeping
immediately after consuming liquids; exposure to sun and fire, travel in vehicles, swimming and
riding on animals soon after consuming food. 54½.


Ahara kala – proper time of meals:-

The ideal time for taking meals is after the elimination of feaces and urine, when the mind is
clean (devoid of emotions), when the Doshas are moving in their natural paths (functioning
normally), when belching are pure without and foul smell or taste, when hunger is well manifest,
when the flatus is moving downward easily, when the digestive activity is keen, when the sense
organs are clear functioning, when the body is light. Food should be consumed observing the
rules and procedures of taking food. That is the ideal time. 54 – 55.

Thus ends the chapter called Matrashitiya, the eighth in the Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya
Samhita.


         Page No. 126                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan