Chapter 20 Nasya Vidhi न य व ध – Nasal
Medication
This chapter explains in detail about types, methods, indications and contra indication of nasal
instillation of medicine – Nasya therapy. It is the 20thchapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana,
written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta.

उ वज ु वकारे षु वशेषा न य म यते
नासा ह शरसो        वारं तेन त    या य हि त तान ् १

Nasya- Nasal medication is especially described for the treatment of diseases of the parts above
the shoulders;
Nose is the gateway for the head, spreading through this, the nasal medication reaches all the
parts of the head and neck and cures the diseases. 1

Trividha Nasya – three kinds of Nasal medication:-

वरे चनं बं ृहणं च शमनं च      धा अ प तत ्

Nasya treatment is of three kinds –
1. Virechana Nasya – purgatory
2. Brimhana Nasya – nourishing and
3. Shamana – Palliative,


Virechana Nasya –

वरे चनं शरः शल
             ू जा य य दगलामये
शोफग डकृ म ि थकु ठाप मारपीनसे

It does purification. It expels the Doshas of head and neck out of the body. It is useful in
Shirashoola – headache,
Jadya – loss of movement of the head, heaviness, stiffness
Syanda – eye diseases
Galamaya – diseases of the throat,
Shopha – swelling,
Ganda – enlargement of glands,
Krumi – worm infestation
Granthi – tumour, fibroid
Kushta – skin diseases
Apasmara – Epilepsy and
Peenasa – rhinitis


          Page No. 252                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shodhana nasya

यथा वं यौ गकैः     ने हैयथा वं च     सा धतैः
क क वाथा द भ चा यं मधप
                     ु वासवैर प

Shodhana nasya is by the use of fats – (oils and ghee), suitable to the diseases and processed
with appropriate drugs, in the form of Paste, decoction etc. and mixed with honey, salt and Asava
(fermented infusion). 5


Brimhana Nasya –

बं ृहणं वातजे शूले सुयावत   वर ये
नासा यशोषे वा स गे कृ        बोधे अवबाहुके

Nourishing type of Nasya treatment is required for
Vataja Shula – headache of Vata origin,
Suryavarta – Headache that increases by the day
Svarakshaya – loss of voice,
Nasa, Asya Shosha – emaciated – dryness of the nose and mouth,
Vak Sangha – Difficulty to speak
Krichra bodha – difficulty in opening of eyes and
Apabahuka- difficulty of movement of the Arm. 3


Brimhana Nasya

बं ृहणं ध वमांस ो थरसास ृ खपुरैर प

Brimhana Nasya is by the use of juice of meat or blood of animals of desert- like lands, mixed
with Khapura –plant extracts, resin, Gums etc.


Shamana Nasya –

शमनं नी लका य गकेशदोषा         रािजषु

Palliative nasal medication is required in
Neelika – blue patches on the skin,
Vyanga – discolored patch on face
diseases of the hair and of the eyes. 4

शमनं योजये पूवः      ीरे ण स ललेन वा

Shamana Nasya is by the use of juice of meat, blood milk or even water. 6


          Page No. 253                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Anya Nasya Prakarah – other kinds of nasal medication :-

मश च      तमश च       वधा   नेहो अ    मा या
क का यैः अवपीड तु स ती णैः मध
                            ू वरे चनैः ७

Marsha and Pratimarsha are the two subdivisions of sneha nasya- nasal medication with fat
material based on the quantity –of fats used.

Avapeeda is from paste (Kalka), fresh juice, decoction and it is a strong purgation to the head. 7

 मानं वरे चन चूण यु      या तं मुखवायुन ा

Dhmana is in the form of powder- to be blown into the nose and is a purgative.

षड गुल वमुखया ना या भेषजगभया
स ह भू रतरं दोषं चूण वादपकष त

It is administered by blowing it inside with the help of air from the mouth, the power held in a
tube of six Angula in length, having opening at both its end. It pulls out the greatly imbalanced
Doshas because it is in the form of powder. 8


Nasya Matra – quantity of nasal drops:-

 दे श य गल
         ु पव वया म नसमु ृ तात ्
याव पत यसौ ब द ुदशा टौ ष          मेण ते
मश यो कृ टम योना मा ा ता एव च              मात ्
ब द ु वयोनाः क कादे ः

The amount of liquid that drops after immersing two digits of the index finger in any liquid and
taking the finger out forms one bindu- 1 drop.
10, 8 and 6 such drops are the maximum, moderate and minimum doses, respectively of Marsha
Nasya (oil / fat medication).
In respect of Paste (Kalka), fresh juice, decoction the doses are less by two bindu. i.e. maximum,
medium and minimum does of Avapidaka kind of nasya are 8,4 and 6 drops respectively. 9-10

Nasya Anarhah – persons unsuitable to nasal medication :-

योजये न तु नावनम ्
तोयम यगर नेहपीतानां पातु म छताम ्
भु तभ त शरः नात नातुकाम ुतास ृजाम ्
नवपीनसवेगातसू तका वासका सनाम ्
शु ानां द तब तीनां तथा अनातवद ु दने
अ य ा य यका      याधेः
         Page No. 254                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Nasal medication should not be administered to persons who
have just then consumed water, wine, artificial poison (Garavisha – chronic poisoning) and fat (as
part of Snehana therapy or who wish to consume them, soon,
who have taken food just then,
who have already taken bath or who desire to take bath-soon,
who have had blood letting therapy- or severe bleeding due to other causes,
who are having acute rhinitis,
Who are getting natural urges of the body;
the woman who has recently delivered,
patients of dyspnoea, COPD, Asthma and cough,
those who have undergone purification (Panchakarma) therapies (Vamana and Virechana)
who have been given Basti treatment – just then,
at unsuitable seasons and
on Sunless cloudy days except in emergency during diseases. 11-12 ½

अथ न यं     योजयेत ्
 ातः ले म ण, म या ने प ते, सायं नशो चले
 व थव ृ ते त ु पूवा ने शर कालवस तयोः १४
शीते म यं दने     ी मे सायं वषासु सातपे
वाता भभूते शर स ह मायामपतानके १५
म या त भे     वर ंशे सायं    ातः दने दने

Nasal medication should be administered in
morning for Shleshma – increase of Kapha,
during midday for pitta,
in the evening or night for the healthy.
During Sharath (Autumn) and Vasantha (Spring), it should be given in forenoon.
During winter, it should be given in midday.
Evenings in Grisma –summer,
when there is sunlight during Varsha- rainy season.
It should be done both in evening and morning daily in the following diseases.
Vataja shiroroga – diseases of the head caused by Vata,
Hikka – Hiccup,
Ayama – tetanus,
Apatanaka - Convulsive disorders,
Manyasthambha – stiffness of the neck, and
Svarakshaya – hoarseness of voice, 13-15

एकाहा तरं अ य      स ताहं च तदाचरे त ्

In other diseases, it should be done on every alternative days for a week. 16


          Page No. 255                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Nasya Vidhi – procedure of medication :-

ि न धि व नो तमा ग य            कृताव यक य च
नवातशयन थ य ज ू व            वेदये त ् पन
                                        ु ः
अथो तानजुदे ह य पा णपादे       सा रते
कि चतु नतपाद य कि च मू न ना मते
नासापुटं पधायैकं पयायेण नषेचये त ्
उ णा बुत तं भैष यं      णा या पचुना अथवा
द ते पादतल क धह तकणा द मदयेत ्
शनै ि छ य न ठ वे पा वयो भयो ततः
आभेषज यादे वं      वि   वा न यमाचरे त ्

The head of the person who has attended to this essential activities – elimination of urine and
faeces, washing of the teeth and mouth etc. earlier, should be massaged with oil and given
fomentation (mild sweating).
He should then be made to lie – on a cot in a room devoid of breeze,
the parts above his shoulders should be given fomentation (mild sweating) once again,
He is made to lie straight with his face upwards, extending his arms and legs,
the medicine slightly warmed with the help of hot water, should be taken either in a tube or
soaked in a piece of cloth, and instilled into each nostril alternately, keeping the other one closed.
After instilling, his soles, neck, palms, ears etc. should be massaged- mildly, he should then turn
to his sides and spit out till the entire medicine comes out.

In this manner two or three nasal medications should be administered to him.

मू छायां शीततोयेन स चे प रहरन ् शरः

Ife goes unconscious, cold water should be sprinkled over the face, avoiding head. 21


Sneha Nasya- Nasal medication with fat materials:-

 नेहं वरे चन या ते द या ोषा यपे या

Nasal medication with fat material should be given at the end of purgative Nasal medications, in
consideration of the Doshas etc.

न या ते वा शतं त ठे द ु तानः धारये ततः
धूमं पी वा कवो णा बुकवलान ् क ठशु ये

After medication is completed, the patient should lie with face upwards, for a period of uttering
one hundred syllables (for 100 seconds),
Then he should inhale smoke of medicated herbs and gargle the month with lukewarm water
many times to cleanse the throat. 21-22 ½

          Page No. 256                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Symptoms of good Sneha nasya (with oil or ghee) –

स यि     न धे सुखो     वास    व नबोधा पाटवम ् २३

(remember that Marsha and Pratimarsha are the two types of Sneha nasya)
Sukha Uchvasa – Expiration without difficulty,
Sukha swapna – sleep
Sukha bodha – easy awakening from sleep and
Akshapatava – keenness of sense organs
are the signs of lubricating nasal therapy properly done. 23


Symptoms of inadequate Sneha nasya (with oil or ghee) –

   े अ     त धता शोषो नासा ये मध
                               ू शू यता

Akshi stabdhata – Loss of movement of the eyes,
Shosha Nasa asye – emaciation, dryness of the nose and mouth
Murdha shunyata – feeling of emptiness inside the head
are the signs of dryness- or inadequate Lubrication.


Symptoms of excess Sneha nasya -

ि न धे अ त क डूगु ता से का चपीनसाः

Kandu – Itching
Guruta – feeling of heaviness of the head,
Praseka – excess salivation,
Aruchi – anorexia
Peenasa – rhinitis
are signs of excess of Lubrications therapy. 24


Symptoms of Good Virechana (Purgation) Nasya therapy -

सु व र ता अ     लघुताव       वर वशु यः
द ु व र ते गदो े कः,   ामता अ त वरे चते

akshikaghuta – lightness of the eyes,
vaktra swara vishuddhi – clean mouth and clear voice;
Inadequate Virechana Nasya (purgative therapy ) causes exacerbation of the diseases and
excess therapy leads to emaciation. 25


          Page No. 257                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pratimarsha Nasya:-

     तमशः      त ामबालव ृ सुखा मसु
 यो यो अकालवष अ प न ि व टो द ु टपीनसे
म यपीते अबल ो े कृ मद ू षतमू न
उि     ल टोि     ल टदोषे च, ह नमा तया ह सः

Pratimarsha Nasya is a type of oil / fat Nasya. Here the dose is very low. Hence, it is indicated in
wide variety of diseases.
It can be administered to
Kshata – wounded,
Kshaama – the emaciated,
Baala – the children,
Vruddha – the aged and
Sukhaatma – those who lead a happy conservative life;
it can be administered even during unsuitable time, season, day etc. It can also be administered
during rainy season.

Contra indication for Pratimarsha nasya –
It is not suitable in
Dushta Peenasa – infective Rhinitis,
Madyapeeta – those who has have drunk wine,
Abalashrota – People with low ears- low hearing capacity
Krumidushita Murdha – head infested with worms,
utklishta Dosha – in whom, in the Doshas are greatly imbalanced and moving from place to
place;
In these conditions, it is not suitable because it is of less quantity. 26-27


Pratimarsha Kala – time to administered Pratimarsha Nasya –

नशाहभु         वा ताहः   व ना व मरे तसाम ्
शरो अ य जन ग डूष              ाव अ जन वचसाम ् ॥२८॥ द तका ट य हास य यो यो अ ते असौ
     व ब द ुक: ।

After head massage
After Gandusha (gargling)
After Anjana – collyrium,
After defecation,
After tooth brushing,
After bouts of laughing ;
its dose is two Bindu- 2 drops. 28

प चसु       ोतसां शु ः , लमनाशि       षु     मात ्
     बलं प चसु, ततो द तदा यं म        छमः


            Page No. 258                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pratimarsha cleanses, clears the channels, relieves fatigue, improves eye sight, bestows sturdiness
to the teeth and mitigates the Vata.29


Kriya Nisiddha Vayas – unsuitable age for therapies –

न न यमूनस ता दे नातीताशी तव सरे
न चोना टादशे धूमः, कवला नोनप चमे
न शु     नदशमे न चाि त ा तस ततौ

Nasya should not be administered to those who are less seven years and more than 80 years of
age;
Dhuma- inhalation of smoke of drugs should not be administered for children below 18 years;
Kavala- mouth gargling should not be administered for children below five years; Shodhana –
purification (Panchakarma) therapies like Vamana, Virechana etc. should not be administered
below 10 years and above 70 years of age. 30-31

आज ममरणं श तः          तमश तु बि तवत ्
मशाव च गण
        ु ान ् कुया स ह न योपसेवनात ्
न चा    य     णा ना प याप यो मशव यम ्

Pratimarsha – kind of nasal medication is good from birth to death just like basti treatment. It
provides the benefits like Marsha Nasya (oil, high dose if used daily, it does not need any control
– regarding food and activities nor it has any risks like Marsha Nasya. 32

तैलमेव च न याथ न या यासेन श यते ॥३३॥ शरस: ले मधाम वात ् नेहा:                     व थ य नेतरे ।

Medicated oil only is ideal for daily use of Nasya (Pratimarsha), because the head is the dwelling
place of kapha and no fat other than oil, can keep it healthy. 33

आशुकृि चरका र वं गुणो कषापकृ टता
मश च        तमश च वशेषो न भवे या द
को मश सपर हारं सापदं च भजे ततः
अ छपान वचारा यौ कुट वातातपि थती
अ वासामा ाब ती च त वदे व व न दशे त ्

Immediate and delayed action, more and less benefits are the results of Marsha and Pratimarsa
respectively.
If there is no difference between then, who will resort to marsha which is associated with controls
– regarding food and activities and risks?
In the same way,
Acchapana – drinking of pure fat alone and
Vicharana- intake of fat mixed with foods etc.
Similar is the case of
Kuti Pravesika – one kind of rejuvenation therapy where the person needs to stay in a house for

            Page No. 259                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
weeks together, taking Chyawanprash etc. and
Vatatapika- Rejuvenation treatment, wherein patient can do his routine work.
Similar is the case of
Anuvasana – fat enema and
Matra basti – fat enema with very little oil 34-36


Anu taila -

जीव तीजलदे वदा जलद व से यगोपी हमं
दाव व मधुक लवागु वर पु       ा व ब वो पलम ्
धाव यौ सरु भं ि थरे कृ महरं प ं    ु ट रे णक
                                           ु ां
कि ज कं कमला वलां शतगुणे द ये अ भ स               वाथयेत ् ३७
तैला सं दशगण
           ु ं प रशो य तेन तैलं पचेत ् स ललेन दशैव वारान ्
पाके     पे चदशमे सममाजद ु धं न यं महागुणमुश यणुतैलमेतत ् ३८

Jivanti, Jala, Devadaru, Jalada, Twak, Sevya, Gopi (sariva), Hima, Darvi twak, Madhuka, Plava,
Agaru, Shatavari, Pundrahva, Bilva, Utpala, the two Dhavani, surabhi, the two Sthira, Krmihara
(Vidanga), Patram (Cinnamon leaf), Truti (Cardamom), Renuka, Kinjalka, Kamala (lotus) and
Bala- are to be boiled in one hundred parts of rain water / pure water and decoction reduced to
one tenth part;
to this decoction, equal quantity of sesame oil is added and cooked for ten times.
(the decoction is added to the oil, boiled till water evaporation. Again, equal quantity of
decoction is added, evaporated. This process is repeated for 10 times. During the tenth cooking,
equal quantity of goats milk (equal to the quantity of oil) is added – and cooking is completed.
This oil known as Anutaila, used as nasal drops, bestows great benefits. 37-38


Nasya Phala- Benefits of Nasya treatment –

घनो नत स न व        क ध ीवा यव सः
 ढे ि   या तप लता भवेयुन यशी लनः

The skin, shoulders, neck face and chest become thick, well developed and bright;
The body parts and the sense organs become strong
disappearance of grey hairs will be obtained by persons who becomes habituated to nasal
medication. 39


Thus ends the chapter Nasya Vidhi- the twentieth in suthrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita.


          Page No. 260                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan