Chapter 10 Rasabhediyam रसभेद यं Tastes, Their
Qualities and Effects

The 10th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana is called as Rasabhediya adhyaya. Rasa means
taste and bheda means types. This chapter discusses in detail regarding the types of tastes and
their properties.


Tastes – Types and introduction


Origin of taste – Rasa utpatti –

 मा भो अि न      मा अ बुतेजः ख वायु अ य नलगो नलैः
 वयो बणैः     मात ् भूतैः मधुरा द रसो वः १

The tastes are formed due to the combination of two Bhutas (primary elements).
Madhura (sweet)                 – Prithvi + Ap (earth + water)
Amla (sour)                     – Tejas + Ap (fire + water)
Lavana (salt)                   – Ap + Tejas (water + fire)
Tikta (bitter)                  – Akasa + Vayu (ether + air)
Katu (pungent)                  – Tejas + Vayu (Fire and air)
Kashaya (astringent)            – Prithvi + Vayu (earth + air) - 1.


Characteristics of tastes - Rasa Lakshana –

Swadu / Madhura (sweet)

तेषां व या सं     वादं ु यो व   मनु ल प त
आ वा यमानो दे ह य       लादनो अ       सादनः
  यः पपी लकाद नम ्

Swadu / Madhura (sweet) is understood by its sticking in the oral cavity, providing a feeling of
contentment and pleasure to the body and comfort to the sense organs. It is liked even by ants 2.

Amla (sour)

अ लः ालयते मुखम ्
हषणो रोमद तानां अ         ुव नकोचनः

Amla (sour) makes the mouth watery, causes horripilation, tingling of the teeth and leads to
closing of the eyes and brows. 3.


         Page No. 135                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Lavana (salt)

लवणः     य दय या यं कपोलगलदाहकृत ्

Lavana (salt) causes more moisture in the mouth (increase salivation) and burning sensation in
the cheeks and throat. 3½.

Tikta (bitter)

त तो वशदय या यं रसनं            तहि त च

Tikta (bitter) cleanses the mouth and destroys the organs of taste (makes perception of other
tastes impossible). 4.

Katu (pungent)

उ वे जय त िज वा ं कुवाि च म चमां कटुः
 ावय त अ       नासा यं कपोलौ दहतीव च

Katu (pungent) stimulates the tip of the tongue, causes irritation, brings out secretions from the
eyes, nose and mouth and causes burning sensation of the cheeks. 5

Kashaya (astringent)

कषायो जडये त ् िज वां क ठ ोतो वब धकृत ्

Kashaya (astringent) inactivates the tongue (diminishes capacity of taste perception) and causes
obstructions of the passage in the throat. 5½.


Action of tastes - Rasa Karma

Sweet taste – Madhura Rasa (taste)

मधुरो रसः
आज मसा        यात ् कु ते धातून ां   बलं बलम ्
बालव ृ    त      ीण वण केश इि        य ओजसाम ्
 श तो बंह
        ृ णः क       यः    त य संधानकृत गु ः
आयु यो जीवनः ि न धः प ता नल वषापहः

Sweet taste being accustomed since birth, produces greater strength in the body tissues. It is very
good for children, the aged, the wounded, the emaciated, improves skin complexion, hairs,
strength of sense organs and Ojas (essence of the tissues, immunity).
Sweet taste causes stoutness of the body, good for the throat, increases breast milk, unites
fractured bones.


          Page No. 136                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Sweet taste is not easily digestible, prolongs life, helps life activities;
It is unctuous, mitigates Pitta, Vata and Visha (poison).
By excess use it produces diseases arising from fat and Kapha, obesity, Asthma,
unconsciousness, diabetes, enlargements of glands of the neck, malignant tumour (cancer) and
such others. 7-9

Sour and Salt tastes –

अ लोअि नद तकृत ् ि न धो           यः पाचनरोचनः
उ ण वीय हम         पशः   ीणनः    लेदनो लघुः
करो त कफ प ता ंमूढवातानुलोमनः

Amla (sour) stimulates the Agni – (digestive activity), is unctuous, good for the heart, digestive,
appetizer, hot in potency, cold on touch (coolant on external applications, relieves burning
sensation), Sour taste satiates, causes moistening, it is easy for digestion, causes aggravation of
Kapha, Pitta and Asra (blood) and makes the inactive Vata move downwards.

सो अ य य त तनोः कुया शै थ यं त मरं                मम ्
क डु पा डुतव वसप शोफ            व फोट तट
                                       ृ        वरान ्

Sour taste if used in excess, causes looseness of the body, loss of strength, blindness, giddiness,
itching (irritation), pallor (whitish yellow discoloration as in anaemia), Visarpa – Herpes,
spreading skin disease, swellings, Visphota (small pox), thirst and fevers. 10 – 11½.

Salt taste – Lavana rasa :

लवणः     तंभ सं घात ब ध व मापनो अि नकृत ्
 नेहनः    वेदनः ती णो रोचन       छे दभेदकृत ्
सो अ तयु तो अ पवनं ख लतं प लतं व लम ्
त ृट कु ठ वष वसपान ् जनये         पये   बलम ्

Lavana (salt) relieves rigidity, clears the obstructions of the channels and pores, increases
digestive activity, lubricates, causes sweating, penetrates deep into the tissues, improves taste,
new growth, abscess etc.).

Used in excess, it causes vitiation of Asra (blood) and Vata, causes baldness, graying of hair,
wrinkles of the skin, thirst, skin diseases, effect of poison, Visarpa – Herpes, spreading skin
disease and decrease of strength of the body. 12 – 13.

Bitter, Pungent and Astringent tastes -

त तः     वयं अरो च णुः अ चं कृ म तट
                                  ृ वषम ्
कु ठ मूछा    वरो    लेशदाह प त कफान ् जये त ्
 लेद मेदो वसा म जा श ु मू ोपशोषणः


          Page No. 137                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
लघुम यो हमो          ः   त यकक ठ वशोधनः
धातु य अ नल याधीन ् अ तयोगा करो त सः

Bitter taste: Tikta by itself is not tasty, but it cures anorexia, worms, thirst, poison, skin diseases,
loss of consciousness, fever, nausea, burning sensations;
Bitter mitigates Pitta and Kapha, dries up moisture, fat, muscle-fat marrow, faeces and urine;

Tikta Rasa is easily digestible, increases intelligence, cold in potency, dry (causes dryness),
cleanses breast milk, and throat.

Used in excess, it causes depletion of Dhatus (tissues) and diseases of Vata origin. 14 – 16.


Actions of pungent taste – Katu Rasa Karma –

कटुः गलामय उदद कु ठ अलसक शोफिजत ्
 ण अवसादनः        नेहमेदः    ले दोपशोषणः
द पनः पाचनो      चयः शोधनो अ न य शोषणः
छ ना त ब धान ्       ोतां स वव ृणो त कफापहः
कु ते सो अ तयोगेन त ृ णां शु बल यम ्
मू छा आकु चनं क पं क टप ृ ठा दषु यथाम ्

Pungent cures diseases of throat, allergic rashes, leprosy and other skin diseases, Alasaka (a kind
of indigestion), swelling (odema); reduces the swelling of the ulcers, dries up the unctuousness
(greasiness), fat, and moisture (water); Pungent taste increases hunger, it is digestive, improves
taste, Shodhana (cleansing, eliminates the Dosas), dries up moisture of the food, breaks up hard
masses, dilates (expands) the channels and balances Kapha.

By over use, it causes thirst, depletion of Sukra (reproductive element, sperm) and strength,
fainting (loss of consciousness) contractures, tremors and pain in the waist, back etc. 17 – 19.

Actions of astringent taste – Kashaya Rasa Karma –

कषायः प तकफहा गु र            वशोधनः
पीडनो रोपणः शीतः         लेद मेदो वशोषणः
आमसं त भनो         ाह        ोअ त    व     सादनः

Kashaya (astringent) balances Pitta and Kapha, it is not easily digestible; cleanses the blood,
causes squeezing and healing of ulcers (wounds), has cold potency, dries up the moisture and fat,
hinders the digestion of undigested food.

Astringent taste is water absorbent, thereby causing constipation, drynessand cleanses the skin
too much.


          Page No. 138                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
करो त शी लतः स अ त व टंभा मान           ु ुजः
तट
 ृ   का य पौ ष        ंश    ोतोरोध मल हान ्

Used in excess, it causes stasis of food without digestion, flatulence, pain in the heart region,
thirst, emaciation, loss of virility, obstruction of the channels and constipation. 20 – 21½.


Madhura Gana – group of sweet substances:

घ ृत हे म गुडा ोडमोचचोचप षकम ्
अभी वीरा पनस राजादनबला यम ्
मेदे चत ः प ण योजीव ती जीवक ऋषभौ
मधूकं मधुकं ब बी वदार          ावणीयुगम ्
  ीर शु ला त ग
             ु ा ीर        ी र यौ का मर सहे
  ीरे ुगो ुर ौ   ा ा दमधुरो गणः

Ghrita (ghee, butter fat), Hema (gold), Guda (molasses),
Akshoda, Mocha, Chocha, Parushaka,
Abhiru, Vira, Panasa, Rajadana,
the three Bala (Bala, Atibala and Nagabala),
The two Medas – Meda and Mahameda,
The four Parni – Shalaparni, Prishnaparni, Mudgaparni, Mashaparni,
Jivanti – Leptadenia reticulata,
Jivaka – Malaxis acuminata D.Don / Microstylis wallichii Lindl. ,
Rishabhaka,
Madhuka – Licorice – Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Madhuka – Madhuka longifolia,
Bimbi – Coccinia grandis / indica,
Vidari – Pueraria tuberosa,
the two Sravani – Mundi and Sravani,
Ksheerasukla, Tugaksiri,
the two Ksheerini, Gambhari,
the two Saha, milk, sugarcane,
Gokshura, Ksaudra, Draksa etc. form the group of sweet substances. 22 – 24.


Amla Gana – group of sour substances:

अ लो धा ीफला ल कामातुलु गा लवेतसम ्
दा डमं रजतं त ं चु ं पालेवतं द ध
आ मा ातकं भ यं क प थं करमदकम ्

Dhatriphala – Amla,
Amlika – tamarind,
Matulunga,

          Page No. 139                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Amlavetasa – Garcinia pedunculata Roxb. / Rheum emodi Wall.,
Dadima – Pomegranate – Punica granatum,
Rajata (Siver), Buttermilk, Chukra, Palevata, Dadhi – Curds, Mango,
Amrataka,
Bhavya – Dillenia indica,
Kapittha – Feronia limonia / Limonia acidissima, Karamardaka etc. form the sour group. 25 – 26.


Lavana Gana – group of salts:-

वरं सौवचलं कृ णं बडं सामु मौ       दम ्
रोमकं पांसुजं शीसं   ार च लवणो गणः

Varam (Saindhava – Rock Salt), Sauvarcala (sochal salt), Krishna (black salt) Bida salt, Samudra
(table salt), Audbhida, Romaka, Pamshuja, Seesa (lead) and Kshara (Alkalies) form the salt
group. 27.


Tikta Gana – group of bitters :-

त तः पदोल       ाय ती वालकोशीर च दनम ्
भू न ब न ब कटुका तगरा गु व सकम ्
न तमाला      वरजनी मु त मूवाट पकम
पाठापामागकां यायोगुडू चध वयासकम ्
प चमल
    ू ं महा    या यौ वशाल अ त वषावचा

Patoli,
Trayanti – Gentiana kurroa,
Valaka,
Usira – Vetiveria zizanioides,
Chandana – Sandalwood,
Bhunimba – The creat (whole plant) – Andrographis paniculata,
Nimba – Neem – Azadirachta indica,
Katuka – Picrorhiza kurroa,
Tagara – Indian Valerian (root) – Valeriana wallichi,
Aguru,
Vatsaka – Holarrhena antidysentirica,
Naktamala,
Turmeric and tree turmeric,
Musta – Nut grass (root) – Cyperus rotundus,
Murva,
Atarushaka – Adhatoda vasica,
Patha – Cyclea peltata,
Apamarga - Prickly Chaff Flower – Achyranthes aspera,
Kamsya (bronze), Ayas (iron),
Guduchi – Tinospora cordifolia


          Page No. 140                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Dhanvayasaka,
Mahat Pancamula – Bilva, Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Gambhari, Patala
the two Vyaghri – Brihati and Kantakari,
Visala, Ativisha, Vacha etc. form the group of bitters. 28 – 29½.


Katu Gana – group of pungents:-

कटुको ह गु म रचकृ मिजत प चकोलकम ्
कुठे रा या ह रतकाः प तं मू म      करम ्

Hingu- Asa foetida
Maricha – Black pepper,
Krimijit – Vidanga,
Panchakola – Chitraka, Pippalmoola, Pippali, Chitraka and ginger,
leafy vegetables such as Kutheraka and others (mentioned in verse 103 of chapter 6 earlier), Pitta
(bile of animals), Mutra (urines), Arushkara etc. form the pungent group. 30 -30½.


Kashaya Varga (Gana) – group of astringents:

वगःकषायः प या ं शर षः ख दरो मधु
कद बोद ु बरं मु ता वाला जनगै रकम ्
बालं क प थं खजूरं वसप ो पला द च

Group of astringents consists of
Pathya – Chebuic Myrobalan (fruit rind) – Terminalia chebula,
Aksha – Terminalia bellirica,
Shireesa,
Khadira – Black catechu (heart wood extract) – Acacia catechu,
Madhu (honey), Kadamba, Udumbara,
Mukta (Pearls), Pravala (Coral),
Anjana – Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata (antimony),
Gairika – Purified Red Ochre,
Bala kapittha,
Kharjura – dates,
Bisa – lotus stalk,
Padma – Nelumbium speciosum,
Utpala – Nymphaea stellata etc 31½ – 32.


         Page No. 141                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
General properties of tastes and exceptions:-

Madhura

मधुरं ले मलं     ायो जीणा छा लयवाहते
मु गात ् गोधूम तः    ौ ात ् सताया जा गला मषात ्

Generally, substances of sweet taste increase Kapha except old Shali (more than one year old
rice) and Yava – Barley – Hordeum vulgare, Mudga (green gram), Godhuma (wheat), Kshaudra
(honey), Sita (sugar) and meat of animals of desert – like lands.

Amla

 ायो अ लं प तजननं दा डमामलकाहते

Generally substances of sour taste aggravate Pitta, except Dadima – Pomegranate – Punica
granatum and Amalaka (Indian gooseberry).

Lavana

अप यं लवणं     ायः च ुषःअ य      सै धवात ्

Generally salts are bad for the eyes (vision) except Saindhava – Rock Salt.

Tikta and Katu

त तं कटु च भू य ठं अ ु यं वातकोपनम ्
ऋते अम ृतापटोल यां शु ठ कृ णा रसोनतः

Generally bitters and pungents are non-aphrodisiacs and aggravate (increase) Vata except for
Amrita (Indian tinospora), Patoli, Shunthi (ginger), Krishna (long pepper) and Rasona – Garlic –
Alium sativum.

Kashaya

कषायं    ायशः शीतं    त भनं चा यां वना

Astringents are usually cold (in potency) and obstructive – except Abhaya – Chebulic Myrobalan
(fruit rind) – Terminalia chebula. 33 – 35½.


          Page No. 142                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Tastes and potency

Hot Potency

रसाः क व ललवणा वयणो णा यथो तरम ्

Katu (pungent), Amla (sour), Lavana (salt) are of hot potency (Ushna Veerya (potency), each
one, more so in their succeeding order;

Cold Potency

त तः कषायो मधुर त वदे व च शीतलाः

Similarly Tikta (bitter), Kashaya (astringent) and Madhura (sweet) are cold in potency, each one
more in their succeeding order.

Ruksha

त तः कटुः कषाय च          ा ब मला तथा

Tikta (bitter), Katu (pungent) and Kashaya (astringent) are dry and cause constipation (each one
more so in their succeeding order)

Snigdha

पटु अ लमधुराः ि न धाः स ृ ट व मू मा ताः

while Patu (salt), Amla (sour), Madhura (sweet) are unctuous and help elimination of faeces,
urine and flatus, each one more so in their succeeding order.

Guru

पटोः कशाय त मा च मधुरः परमं गु ः

Patu (salt), Kashaya (astringent) and Madhura (sweet) are heavy to digest, each one more so in
their succeeding order

Amla

लघुर लः कटु त मात ् त माद प च त तकः

While Amla (sour), Katu (pungent) and Tikta (bitter) are easy to digest, each one more so in their
succeeding orde 36 – 38½.


          Page No. 143                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Rasa Samyoga Samkhya – number of combination of tastes:-

संयोगाः स तप चाश क पना त ु              षि टधा
रसानां यौ गक वेन         यथा थल
                              ू ं वभ यते

The combination of tastes will be fifty seven, but their actual counting will be sixty three, on the
basis of their usage (in daily routine of selection of drugs, planning of therapies etc.)

एकैकह ना तान ् प चदश याि त रस               वके
    के     वाद ुदशा लः पटु   ीन ् पटुि त तं एककम ्
चत ु केषु दश        वाद ु चतुरो अ लः पटुः सकृ त ्
प चके वे कमेवा लो मधरु ः प च सेवते
    यमेकं षडा वादामसंयु ता च ष साः

Eliminating 1 rasa at each combination , the number of combination of 2 rasas each will be
15

In the combination of 3 rasas each , it will be
10 with svadu, 6 with amla, 3 with lavana, 1 with tikta
total 20

In the combination of 4 rasas
 it will be 10 with svadu, 4 with amla, 1 with lavana
total 15

In the combination of 5 rasas
it will be 1 with amla, 5 with svadu
total 6

In the combination of all the 6 rasas
it will be one

Each rasa individually will be 6

Thus forming 63 combinations in total

ष        प चका, ष    च    ुथ साः     यु चतु वकौ प चदश कारौ
मेदाि      का वंश तरे कमेव         यं षडा वाद म त    षि ठ


             Page No. 144                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
TO SUM UP

The combination of 5 rasas it is 6
1 of six rasa individually
                It is 15 of twos
                It is 15 of fours
                20 of threes
                1 of all tastes together
                Total = 63

Each taste separately = 6
          1. Madhura
          2. Amla
          3. Lavana
          4. Katu
          5. Tikta
          6. Kashaya

Combination of 2 tastes = 15

           1. Madhura + amla
           2. Madhura + tikta
           3. Madhura + lavana
           4. Madhura + kashaya
           5. Madhura + katu
           6. Amla + lavana
           7. Amla+ tikta
           8. Amla + katu
           9. Amla +kashaya
           10. Lavana + tikta
           11. Lavana + katu
           12. Lavana +kashaya
           13. Tikta + katu
           14. Tikta+ kashaya
           15. Katu + kashaya

Combination of 3 tastes =20
        1. Madhura + amla + lavana
        2. Madhura+ amla + tikta
        3. Madhura+ amla + katu
        4. Madhura + amla + kashaya
        5. Madhura+ lavana + tikta
        6. Madhura + lavana + katu
        7. Madhura+ lavana + kashaya
        8. Madhura + tikta + katu
        9. Madhura+ tikta + kashaya
        10. Madhura + katu + kashaya
        11. Amla+ lavana + tikta
        12. Amla+ lavana + katu
        13. Amla+ lavana +kashaya

          Page No. 145                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
          14. Amla+ tikta + katu
          15. Amla+ tikta + kashaya
          16. Amla+ katu + kashaya
          17. Lavana+ tikta + katu
          18. Lavana+ tikta + kashaya
          19. Lavana+ katu + kashaya
          20. Tikta+ katu + kashaya


Combination of 4 tastes = 15
        1.    Madhura + amla + lavana + tikta
        2.    Madhura+ amla + lavana +katu
        3.    Madhura+ amla + lavana +kashaya
        4.    Madhura + amla + tikta+ katu
        5.    Madhura+ amla + tikta+ kashaya
        6.    Madhura+ amla + katu + kashaya
        7.    Madhura+ lavana + tikta + katu
        8.    Madhura+ lavana + tikta + kashaya
        9.    Madhura+ lavana+ katu + kashaya
        10. Madhura + tikta + katu + kashaya
        11. Amla+ lavana + tikta+katu
        12. Amla+ lavana + tikta + kashaya
        13. Amla+ lavana + katu + kashaya
        14 Amla+ tikta + katu + kashaya
        15. Lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya


Combination of 5 tastes
        1. Madhura + amla + lavana + tikta+ katu
        2. Madhura + amla + lavana + tikta+kashaya
        3. Madhura + amla + lavana +katu + kashaya
        4. Madhura + lavana + tikta+ katu + kashaya
        5. Madhura + amla + tikta+ katu + kashaya
        6. Amla + lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya


Combination of 6 tastes =1
        1. Madhura + Amla + lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya

ते रसानुरसतो रसभेदा तारत यप रक पनया च
संभवि त गणनां समतीता दोषमेषजवशाद ुपयो याः

These Rasa (primary tastes) and Anurasas (secondary tastes) in their proportional (more,
moderate and less) combinations become innumerable. These are to be selected and used after
considering the conditions of the Dosas and drugs (and therapies). 44.


Thus ends the chapter entitled Rasabhediya, the tenth in Sutrasthana of Ashtangahurdayam.


         Page No. 146                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan