Chapter 3: Ritucharya adhyaya ऋतुचया Seasonal
Regimen

Ritucharya – Ayurvedic Seasonal Regimen

Ritucharya is the 3rd chapter of Ashtanga Hrudayam. The word Ritucharya is made of two words
– Ritu means seasons Charya means do’s and don’ts (regimen). This important chapter
discusses in detail regarding different seasons and the regimen to be followed.


Six Seasons – in the Ancient Ayurvedic Calendar -

मासै वसं यैमाघा यैः       मात ् ष   ऋतवः      म ृताः
श शरो अथ वस त च            ी मो वषशर हमाः
श शरा याि       भ तै तु व यादयनमु तरम ्
आदानं च, तदाद ते न ृणां      त दनं बलम ्

A season (Ritu) is comprised of two months (two Masa).
Shishira Ritu (winter, dewy season) – Magha and Phalguna (Mid January – Mid March)
Vasanta Ritu (Spring season) – Chaitra and Vaishakha (Mid March – Mid May)
Greeshma Ritu (Summer season) – Jyeshta and Ashadha (Mid May to Mid July)
The above three Ritus form Uttarayana – Northern solstice. Here, fire is dominant. It is also
called as Adana Kala, wherein the human strength is relatively low.

Varsha Ritu (Rainy Season) – Shravana and Bhadrapada – Mid July – mid September
Sharath Ritu (Autumn season) – Ashvayuja and Karthika – Mid September to Mid November
Hemantha Ritu (Winter season) – Margashira and Pushya - Mid November to Mid January
These three seasons form Dakshinayana – Southern solstice. It is also called as Visarga Kala,
wherein the human strength will be relatively high.

Uttarayana – Adana kala – Northern Solstice – mid January – mid July

ति म    य यथती णो ण          ा माग वभावतः
आ द यपवनाः सौ यान ्        पयि त गुणान ् भुवः
त तः कषायः कटुको ब लनो अ             रसा    मात ्
त मादादानमा नेयम ्

Because of the nature of the path, both the Sun and wind become very strong, powerful and dry
during this half of the year. It takes away all the cooling qualities of the earth. Bitter, Astringent
and Pungent tastes (Tikta, kashaya and Katu Rasas) will be more powerful, respectively, in the
successive Ritus. Hence Adana Kala is dominated by fire.


          Page No. 25                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Dakshinayana – Visarga Kala – Southern Solstice – mid July – mid January

ऋतवो द     णायनम ्
वषादयो वसग च य बलं वसज
                     ृ ा ययम ्
सौ य वाद     सोमो ह बलवान ् ह यते र वः
मेघव ृ य नलैः शीतैः शा ततापे मह तले
ि न धा चेहा ललवणमधुरा ब लनो रसाः

During this period, the Sun releases strength of the people. Here moon is more powerful, earth is
cooled down due to clouds, rain and cold wind. Sour, Salt and sweet (Amla, Lavana and
Madhura) tastes are dominant respectively during the three seasons of this period.


Variation in strength as per season -

शीते अ यं, व ृि त घम अ पं बलं , म यं तु शेषयो: ।
śīte agryaṃ, vṛṣti gharme alpaṃ balaṃ, madhyaṃ tu śeṣayo: |

Winter – Hemantha and Shishira – mid November – mid March – Highest strength
Summer and rainy seasons – mid May – mid September – Lowest strength
Spring and Autumn – Medium strength.


1. Hemanta Ritucharya – Ayurveda Winter regimen: Mid November – Mid January

ब लनः शीतसंरोधा ेम ते       बलो अनलः
भव य पे धनो धातून ् स पचे वायुने रतः
अतो हमे अि म सेवेत        वा व ललवणा सान ्

During Hemantha, the people are strong, digestive fire becomes powerful, because it gets
obstructed from flowing outward due to external winter. Like fuel consumes the things that it
comes into contact, digestive fire may cause emaciation of body tissues. Hence, in this period,
one should consume food predominant with sweet sour and salt tastes.

दै या नशानामे त ह    ातरे व बुभु   तः
अव यकाय स भा य यथो तं शीलयेदनु
वात नतैलैर य गं मूि न तैलं वमदनम ्
नयु ं कुशलैः साध पादाघातं च युि ततः

As the nights are longer, person feels hungry early in the morning. So, after attending to
oblutions, one should resort to Abhaynga (oil massage) with oils that have Vata balancing
properties. Massage should be done especially to scalp and forehead. Mild massaging, wrestling
till one’s half strength and trampling of the body is recommended.


         Page No. 26                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
कषायप त नेह ततः         नातो यथा व ध
कु कुमेन सदपण       द धो अगु धू पतः
रसान ् ि न धं पलं पु टं गौडम छसुरां सुराम ्
गोधूम प टमाषे ु ीरो थ वकृतीः शुभाः
नवम नं वसां तैलं , शौचकाय सुखोदकम ्
 ावरािजनकौशेय वेणीकौचवा त ृतम ्
उ ण वभावैलघु भः      ावत
                       ृ ः शयनं भजेत ्
यु   या अक करणान ् वे दं पाद ाणं च सवदा

After this, oil is washed off with astringent powders and bathing. Then fine powder of Saffron
and kasthuri (musk) is applied. The body is exposed to the fumes of aguru (Aquilaria agallocha)
Since the digestion power is high, heavy-to-digest food such as meat soup mixed with fats, meat
of well nourished animals, wine prepared with jaggery, supernatant part of wine (Sura) should be
had more.

Food prepared with wheat flour, black gram products of sugarcane and of milk, food prepared
from freshly harvested corn, muscles, fat and edible oils should be partaken as food.
Warm water should be used for oblutions, thick sheet made of cotton, leather, silk, wool or bark
of trees that are light in weight should be used during sleep. Exposure to sunlight and fire should
be resorted to, judiciously. Foot wear should be worn always.

पीवरो   तान ो यः समदाः       मदाः     याः
हरि त शीतमु णा      यो धप
                        ू कु कुमयौवनैः

Women who have - well developed thighs, breasts, buttocks, who are enchanting, and exhilarated
by the use of - fragrant fumes, scents, yuthfulness, and thus made warm in their body, who are
liked, drive away the cold by their embrace.
One may have sex as per his liking.

अ गारतापस त तगभभूवे मचा रणः
शीतपा   यज नतो न दोषो जातु जायते

Persons who spend their time residing in houses kept warm by fire, in inner most apartment
encircled with others, or in underground chambers, will not be affected by diseases due to cold
and dryness.

Overall, in Hemantha Ritu, the strength and digestion power are more. Hence one can exercise,
undergo oil massage, eat heavy foods and may have sex.

2. Sisira Rutu charya – Ayurveda winter regimen – Mid January – Mid March:

अयमेव व ध: काय: ि शरे ऽ प वशेषत: । तदा ह शीतम धकं रौ यं चादानकालजम ् ॥
ayameva vidhi: kārya: śśire’pi viśeṣata: | tadā hi śītamadhikaṃ raukṣyaṃ cādānakālajam ||

Even in shishira Ritu, the same regimen, as described above should be adopted with more
intensity. During this period cold is severe and dryness more.
          Page No. 27                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
3. Vasanta Rutucharya (Ayurveda Spring regimen) – Mid March – Mid May

कफि चतो ह श शरे वस ते अकाशुता पतः
ह वा अि नं कु ते रोगानत तं वरया जये त ्
ती णैवमनन या यैलघु         ै च भोजनैः
 यायामो वतनाघातैिज वा ले माणमु बणम ्
    नातो अनु ल तः कपूरच दनागु कु कुमैः
पुराणयवगोधूम ौ जा गलशू यभुक्
सहकाररसोि म ाना वा य          यया अ पतान ्
    या यस गसुरभीन ्      यने ो पला कतान ्
सौमन यकृ तो       या   य यै ः स हतः पबे त ्
नगदानासवा र टसीधुमा वीकमाधवान ्
श ृ गबे रा बु सारा बु म व बु जलदा बु च

Kapha which has undergone increase in Shishira (cold season) becomes liquefied by the heat of
the Sun in Vasanta (spring). It diminishes the digestive fire (Agni) and gives rise to many
diseases. Hence Kapha should be controlled quickly, by resorting to strong emesis therapy
(Vamana Panchakarma procedure), Nasya (nasal medication) and other therapies.
Food should also be chosen to mitigate Kapha, that are easily digestible and dry (moisture-free,
fat-free).

Physical exercises, dry massage and mild trampling should be done.
Having thus mitigated the kapha, the person should take bath, anoint the body with the paste of
karpura (camphor), candana (sandalwood), aguru (Aquilaria agallocha), and kumkuma (saffron).
Have one year old barley, wheat and honey, meat of animals of desert-like land, and meat roasted
in fire as food;

Drink the juice of mango fruit mixed with fragrant substances, in the company of friends, getting
it served by the beloved; the drink, thereby producing satisfaction.
Beverages such as asava (fermented infusion), arista (fermented decoction), sidhu (fermented
infusion), mardvika (fermented grape juice), or sarambu (extract of trees such as asana, candana
etc.) or water mixed with honey, or water boiled with jalada (musta – Nut grass). 18-22

द     णा नलशीतेषु प रतो जलवा हषु
अ ु टन टसय
         ू षु म णकु मकाि तषु
परपु ट वघु टे षु कामकमा तभू मषु
व च पु पव ृ ेषु काननेषु सुगि धषु
गो ठ कथा भ च ा भम यहनं गमये सुखी

The person should spend his midday in the company of friends engaged in pleasant
games, pastimes, story telling etc., in forests (or gardens). The gardens should have cool breeze
from south direction, with plenty of reservoirs of water all around, invisible or poor sunlight, the


           Page No. 28                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
land covered with shining crystals, with the cuckoo everywhere making pleasant sounds and
engaged in love-play, with trees and different kinds of beautiful and sweet smelling flowers.

गु शीत दवा व नि न धा लमधुरां         येजेत ्

Avoid foods that are hard to-digest and cold, sleeping at day time, foods which are fatty, sour and
sweet. Because, all these will increase Kapha.


4. Greeshma Ritucharya (Ayurveda Summer Regimen) Mid May – Mid July:

ती णांशुर तती णांशु     मे सं   पतीव यत ्
  यहं    ीयते ले मा तेन वायु च वधते
अतो अि म पटुक व ल यायामाकरां           यजेत ्

In Greesma (summer) the sun rays become powerful and appear to be destructive. Kapha
decreases day by day and Vata increases consequently, hence avoid use of salt, pungent and sour
foods, heavy physical exercises and exposure to sunlight, during this season. 26-27

भजे मधुरसे वा नं लघु ि न धं हमं       वम ्
सश
 ु ीततोय स ता गो ल या स तन
                         ू ् सशकरान ्

Food which are sweet, light (easy to digest), fatty, cold and liquid should be taken, take
cornflour mixed with cold water and sugar after taking bath in cold water.


Indication for limited use of wine during summer:

म यं न पेयं, पेयं वा व पं , सुबहुवा र वा । अ यथा शोफ शै थ य दाह मोहान ् करो त तत ् ॥ २९
madyaṃ na peyaṃ, peyaṃ vā svalpaṃ, subahuvāri vā | anyathā śopha śaithilya dāha mohān
karoti tat || 29

Madya (wine) should not be taken; if very necessary, taken in very little quantity or diluted with
more quantity of water; if wine is taken in large doses, it will cause inflammatory conditions, and
it will make the body fragile and weak, increases burning sensation and causes delusion.


कु दे द ुधवलं शाल म नीया जा गलैः पलैः
पबे सं ना तघनं रसालां रागखा डवौ
पानकं प चसारं वा नवम ृ ाजने ि थतम ्
मोचचोचदलैयु तं सा लं म ृ मयशिु त भः
पाटलावा सतं चा भः सकपूरं सुशीतलम ्

During summer, boiled rice, which is white in colour, (like full moon) should be eaten along with
meat of animals of desert.
Meat juice (Mamsarasa) which is not very thick,
          Page No. 29                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Rasala (curds churned and mixed with pepper powder and sugar),
Raga (syrup which is sweet, sour and salty) and
Khandava (syrup which has all the tastes, prepared with many substances),
Panaka panchasara, (syrup prepared with raisins (draksha), madhuka, dates (karjura), kasmarya,
and parushaka fruits all in equal quantities, cooled and added with powder of cinnamon leaves,
cinnamon and cardamom etc) and kept inside a fresh mud pot, along with leaves of plantain and
coconut trees, and made sour (fermented) should be drunk in mugs of mud or shell;
Very cool water kept in mud pot along with flowers of patala and karpura (camphor) should be
used for drinking.

शशा क करणान ् भ यान ् रज यां भ यन ् पबेत ्
स सतं मा हषं       ीरं च    न    शीतलम ्

Food articles like sasanka kirana (hollow, finger-like, fried pastry made of corn flour) should be
taken at night;
Buffalo milk mixed with sugar and cooled by moonlight and the stars should be used for
drinking. 33-36

अ      कषमहाशालताल          ो णरि मषु
वनेषु माधवीि ल ट ा ा तवकशा लषु
सुगि ध हमपानीय स यमानपटा लके
कायमाने चते चूत वालफललुि ब भः
कदल दलक लारमण
            ृ ालकमालो पलैः
कोमलैः कि पते त पे हस कुसुमप लवे
म यं दनेअकतापातः           व या ाराग ृहे अथवा
पु त    ी तनह ता य व ृ तोशीरवा र ण

Day time should be spent in forests having tall trees reaching the sky such as shala (Shorea
robusta, Tala – Borassus flabellifera etc, which obstruct the hot rays of the sun, or in houses
around which bunches of flowers and grapes are hanging from their creepers.
Sheets of cloth spreading sweet scented water, are arranged (to fan the air) , all around.
Sleep on soft bed prepared with flowers of banana, kalbara, lotus etc. with fully blossomed
flowers place all over.

Spend the day remaining inside the house cooled by water fountains, water being scented with
usheera (Cus Cus grass), and thereby relieve yourself from the heat of the sun.

नशाकरकराक ण सौधप ृ ठे नरासु च
आसना      व थ च त य च दना            य मा लनः
नव ृ तकामत         य सुसू मतनुवाससः
जला तालव ृ ता न व तत
                   ृ ाः प           नीपुटाः
उ   ेपा च म ृद ू   ेपा जलव ष हमा नलाः
कपूरमि लकामाला हाराः सह रच दनाः

          Page No. 30                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
मनोहरकलालापाः शशवः सा रकाः शुकाः
मण
 ृ ालवलयाः का ताः      ो फु लकमलो        वलाः
ज गमा इव प        यो हरि त द यताः      लमम ्

Night regimen: At nights, one should sleep on the terrace, facing moonlight. Exhaustion due to
heat of the day is relieved by, anointing the body with paste of sandalwood, wearing garlands,
avoidance of sexual activities, wearing of very light and thin dress, by fanning with fans made
of leaves of Tala or large leaves of padmini (lily) made wet; syringes sprinkling cool water
softly, garlands of flowers of camphor, jasmine and of pearls and beads of white sandal paste,
children, sarika (mynah bird) and shuka (parrot) talking pleasantly; beautiful woman wearing
bangles of soft lotus stalk, blossoms of lotus in their hair, moving about nearby.


5. Varsha Ritu carya- (Ayurveda seasonal regimen for rainy season) – Mid July – Mid
September:

आदान लानवपष
          ु ामि न स नो अ प सीद त
वषासु दोषैद ु यि त ते अ बुल बा बुदे अ बरे
सतष
  ु ारे ण म ता सहसा शीतलेन च
भूबा पेणअ लपाकेन म लनेन च वा रणा
वि ननैव च म दे न , तेि व य यो अ यद ू षषु
भजे साधारणं सवमू मण तेजनं च यत ्

In rainy season, the agni (digestive activity) is weak. It is already debilitated by summer, it
undergoes further decrease and gets vitiated by the Doshas. The Doshas get aggravated by the
effect of thick clouds full of water, cold wind having snow, dirty water because of rain, warmth
of the earth and sourness.

The poor strength of digestive activity the Doshas start vitiating one another and cause many
diseases.
Hence all general measures to mitigate imbalanced Doshas and to improve digestive activity
should be adopted. 42-44

आ थापनं शु तनुज ण धा यं रसान ् कृतान ्
जा गलं प शतं यूषान ् म व र टं चर तनम ्
म त ु सौवचला यं वा प चकोलावचू णतम ्
द यं कौपं शत
           ृ ं चा भो भोजनं व तद ु दने
 य ता ललवणा नेहं संशु कं       ौ व लघु

One should undergo Panchakarma therapies.
After that the person should also be administered asthapana basti (decoction enema therapy).
He should use old grains for food, meat juice processed with spices etc.
Meat of animals of desert-like lands, soup of pulses , wine prepared from grapes and fermented
decoctions, which are old or mastu (whey, thin water or curds) processed with more of Sochal
         Page No. 31                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
salt and powder of panchakola, should be used. Rain water or water from deep wells, well boiled
should be used for drinking. On days of no sunlight at all, the food should predominantly sour,
salty and unctuous, dry, mixed with honey and easily digestible. 45-46 ½

अपादचार सुर भः सततं धू पता बरः
ह यप ृ ठे वसे बा पशीतशीकरविजते

Person should not move about on foot (move only on vehicles) should use perfumes, expose his
clothes to fragrant fumes, dwell in upper stories of the house, devoid of heat, cold and snow.

नद जलोदम थाहः व नायासातपां यजेत ्

Avoid - River water, udamantha (beverage prepared with flour of corns mixed with ghee),
sleeping at daytime, exertion and exposure to Sun. 48


6. Sharath Ritucharya – (Ayurveda autumn regimen) – Mid September – Mid November:

वषाशीतो चता गानां सहसैवाकरि म भः
त तानां सि चतं व ृ टौ प तं शर द कु य त
त जयाय घत
        ृ ं त तं वरे को र तमो णम ्

The person becomes accustomed to the cold of rainy season. When he gets suddenly exposed to
the warm rays of Sun, the Pitta, which has undergone increase in Varsha (rainy season) becomes
greatly aggravated during sharath (autumn). In order to get over it, Tikta ghrita (medicated ghee
recipe described in the treatment of kustha chapter 19 of Chikitsa sthana), purgation therapy and
blood letting should be resorted to. 49 ½

त तं    वाद ु कषायं च    ु धतो अ नं भजे लघु
शा लमु ग सताधा ीपटोलमधुजा गलम ्

When hungry, the person should take foods which are of bitter, sweet and astringent tastes, and
easily digestible such as Rice, green gram, sugar, Amla, Patola, honey and meat of animals of
desert-like lands. 50 ½


Hamsodaka -

त तं त तांशु करणै: शीतं शीतांशु रि म भ: ॥ सम तात ् अ यहोरा ं अग           योदय न वषम ् ।
शु च हंसोदकं नाम नमलं मलिज जलम ् ॥ ना भ यि द न वा                 ं पाना दषु अम त
                                                                                ृ ोपमम ् ।
taptaṃ taptāṃśukiraṇai: śītaṃ śītāṃśu raśmibhi: || samantāt apyahorātraṃ agastyodaya nirviṣam |
śuci haṃsodakaṃ nāma nirmalaṃ malajijjalam || nābhiṣyandi na vā rūkṣaṃ pānādiṣu
amṛtopamam |

The water which gets heated by the hot rays of the sun during day cooled by the cool rays of the
moon during night, for many days continuously, which has been de-poisoned (detoxicated) by

         Page No. 32                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
the rise of the star Agatya, which is pure, uncontaminated and capable of mitigating the malas
(dosas) is known as Hamsodaka. It is neither abhisyandi (producing more secretion or moisture
inside the minute channels so as to block them) nor dry, such water is like Amrita (nector) for
drinking and other purpose. 51-52

च दनोशीरकपूरमु ता        वसनो    वलः
सौधेषु सौधधवलां चि       कां रजनीमुखे

Evening should be spent on the terraces of houses which are white (by painting), anointing the
body with the paste of Sandalwood, Cus Cus grass, Camphor, wearing garlands of pearls and
shining dress and enjoying the moonlight.

तष
 ु ार ारसौ ह यद धतैल वसातपान ्
ती णम य दवा व नपुरोवातान ् प र यजेत ्

Avoid exposure to snow (mist), indulgence in alkaline substances, satiation with hearty meal, use
of curds, oil, muscle fat, exposure to sunlight, strong liquors, sleeping at day time and the
eastern breeze. 54 ½


Use of taste as per season:

शीते वषासु चा यां      ीन ् वस ते अ यान ् रसा भजेत ्
 वादं ु नदाघे , शर द   वाद ु त तकषायकान ्
शर वस तयो         ं शीतं घमघना तयोः
अ नपानं समासेन वपर तमतो अ यथा

During winters, (Hemanta and Shishira) and varsa (rainy season), Sweet, Sour and salt tastes
should be especially used.
Bitter, pungent and astringent tastes should be used more during vasanta (spring season),
Sweet taste should be used more during Nidagha (summer); and
Sweet, bitter and astringent tastes should be used during Sharath (autumn).


Qualities of food as per season:
The food and drink should be dry (moisture less, fat-less) during Sharat and Vasanta (autumn and
spring) and food should be cold during gharma (summer) and ghnanta (end of rainy season) and
should be hot in other seasons. 55-56.

 न यं सवरसा यास: व वा ध यम ृताव ृतौ ॥
nityaṃ sarvarasābhyāsa: svasvādhikyamṛtāvṛtau ||

The habit of using all the six tastes every day is ideal for maintenance of health. However, during
particular seasons, the particular tastes should be given special emphasis. 57.


          Page No. 33                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Ritusandhi- (inter-seasonal period) :-

ऋ वो: अ या द स ताहौ ऋतुसि ध र त             म ृत: । त   पूव   वध     या य: सेवनीयो अपरळ्            मात ्
॥ असा यजा ह रोगा: य:ु सहसा यागशीलनात ् ॥
ṛtvo: antyādi saptāhau ṛtusandhiriti smṛta: | tatra pūrvo vidhistyājya: sevanīyo aparaḻ kramāt ||
asātmyajā hi rogā: syu: sahasā tyāgaśīlanāt ||

The seven days at the end and commencement of a season is known as Rtusandhi (inter seasonal
period). During this period, the regimen of the preceding season should be discontinued gradually
and that of the succeeding season should be gradually adopted; sudden discontinuance or sudden
adoption gives rise to diseases caused by asatmya (non-habituation). 58-59 ½


Thus ends the chapter- named Ritucayra, the third of Sutrasthana of Astanga Hridaya samhita
composed by Srimad Vagbhata, Son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta.


          Page No. 34                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan