Chapter 28 Shalya Aaharan Vidhi श यआहरण व ध
Removal of Foreign Body

This chapter deals with different techniques that were used in ancient times for foreign body
removal. During ancient times, during war, arrows, and other sharp instruments were used.
Hence, this topic had special significance. This is the 28th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya
Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is
Shalya aharana Vidhi.

Shalya means a foreign body. Aharana means extraction, pulling out etc.


Shalya gati - direction of entry of foreign bodies-

व जु तयगू वाधः श यानां प चधा ग तः

Vakra – Irregular – curved,
Ruju – straight,
Tiryak – horizontal,
Urdhwa – upward and
Adha – downward are the five Shalyagati (directions of movement of the foreign bodies)


Shalya Vrana - ulcer with a foreign body inside:-

 यामं शोफ जाव तं शो णतं मह
                         ु ुः
अ यु गतं बु बुदवि प टकोप चतं      णम ्
म ृद ुमांसं च जानीयद तः श यं समासतः

Blue discolouration, swelling, pain, frequent bleeding, elevated like a bubble, studded with
eruptions and softening of muscles are the features from which a wound having a foreign body
should be recognized. 1-2

वशेषात ् व गते श ये ववणः क ठनायतः
शोफो भव त मांस थे चोषः शोफो वव ते
पीडना ामता पाकः श यमाग न रोह त
पे य तरगते मांस ा तवत ् वयुथुं वना

Tvak gata – When the foreign body is in the skin, there is discoloration, hard and large
swelling;

Mamsagata (when it is in the muscle), there will be sucking pain, steady progress of the
swelling, tenderness, suppuration and non- healing of the wounds of entry of the foreign body;

         Page No. 318                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
when it is in between two muscles (Peshi) the signs will be similar that residing inside the
muscle except the swelling 3-4

आ ेपः     नायुजाल य संर भ त भवेदना
 नायुगे द ुहरं चैतत ्
सरा मानं सरा       ते
 वकमगुणहा नः        यात ्   ोतसां   ोत स ि थते
धमनी थे अ नलो र तं फेनयु तमद
                           ु रये त ् ६
नया त श दवान ् या च            लासः सा गवेदनः
स घष बलवानि थसि ध ा ते अि थपूणता ७
नैक पा जो अि थ थे शोफः त व च सि धगे
चे टा नव ृि त च भवेत ् आटोपः को ठसं         ते ८
आनाहो अ नशकृ मू दशनं च              नानने
व या ममगतं श यं मम व ोपल णैः ९
यथा वं च प र ावैः वगा दषु वभावयेत ्

Snayugata shalya (tendons) – Convulsions, shock, stiffness, loss of movements and severe pain
are the symptoms when the foreign body is in tendons. when foreign body is in the tendons and is
difficult to remove;

Siragata shalya (veins) – there is distention of the vein; when lodged in the veins, there is
distention of the vein;

Srotogata Shalya (body channels) – there will be loss of their respective functions and qualities,

Dhamanigata shalya (arteries) – bleeding with frothing, chest discomfort, nausea and body
ache;

Sandhiagata (joints) – severe shock, pain and filling up of different types of fluids and swelling

Asthigata (bones) – the signs are the same, with loss of movement also.

Koshtagata (abdomen) – there will be distention and appearance of food faecal matter and
urine at the orifice of the wound.

Marmagata (vital spots) – appearance of signs of injury to such spots.
In addition to the general signs, enumerated so far, even their discharges- fluids coming out from
them such as Lasika (Lymph) from skin, Rakta (blood) from veins and Arteries, Majja – marrow
bones etc. should be observed. 5-9 ½

  यते शु दे हानामनुलोमि थतं तु तत ्
दोषकोपा भघाता द ोभा ूयो अ प बाधते


          Page No. 319                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
If foreign body is lodged in persons who have pure body – purified with therapies such as
Panchakarma and if the foreign body enters in the same line of the organ, the chances of healing
are good. If the body is not purified, it produces serves distress due to aggravation of Doshas. 10


Recognizing the site of foreign body beneath the skin –

 व न टे य     त       युर य ग वे दमदनैः
राग     दाहसंर भा य     चा यं वल यते
आशु शु य त लेपो वात        थानं श यव वदे त ्
मांस ण टं संशु या कशना        लथतां गतम ्
    ोभा ागा द भः श यं ल येत ् त वदे व च
पे यि थसि धको ठे षु न टमि थषु ल येत ्
अ      नाम य जन वेदब धपीडनमदनैः
 सारणाकु चनतः सि धन टं तथा अि थवत ्

The exact site of foreign bodies concealed in the skin, is recognized by
The appearance of redness,
pain, burning sensation and tenderness after anointing with oil, fomentation or massage;
by the melting of solid ghee, placed at the site,
by quick drying of the paste of sandal wood etc.

न टे    नायु शरा ोतोधमनी वसमे प थ
अ वयु तं रथं ख डच मारो य रो गणम ्
शी ं नये तत त य संर भा छ यमा दशे त ्

Site of foreign body concealed in the muscle, joint and abdomen – canbe recognized by
clearing looseness, thinness of the muscles by Panchakarma therapies or by other methods of
slimming the body and then observing for sites of pain, redness etc.

The site of those concealed in the bones is recognized by anointing with oil, fomentation, tying
with rope or bandage squeezing and massaging;

The sites of those concealed in the joints by extending or folding of joint in addition to signs
similar to lodged in bones.

Sites of those concealed in tendons, veins, channels and arteries are recognized by appearance
of pain in such places, in a horse chariot, with broken wheels.

ममन टं प ृथ नो तं तेष ां मांसा दसं यात ्

Features of those concealed, in vulnerable spots are not described separately because such spots
are composed of muscles and other tissues only- the features of which have been described
already.


           Page No. 320                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
सामा येन सश यं तु           ो भ या     यया स क्

Generally the site of the foreign body is determined by the appearance of distressing symptoms,
abnormal movements etc. during activity and by the presence of pain. 17

व ृ तं प ृथु चत ु कोणं     पुटं च समासतः
अ ृ यश यसं थानं           णाकृ या वभावयेत ्

The shape of the invisible foreign body is determined by the shape of the wound, such as round –
circular wide, with four Angula, with 3 edges. Etc.18


Shalyaharana- removal of foreign bodies:-

तेषामाहरणोपायौ           तलोमानल
                               ु ोमकौ
अवाचीनपराचीने नहरे त वपययात ्

Method of their removal are though upward and downward directions;
those entering into the body from above and below should be taken out in the opposite directions
respectively. 19

सुखाहाय यति       छ वा तति तय गतं हरे त ्

Those which have entered from sideward – horizontally should be removed by cutting it
conveniently. 19 ½

श यं न नघा यमुरः क ाव                णपा वगम ्
  तलोममनु तु डं छे यं प ृथुमुखं च यत ्
नैवाहरो दश य नं न टं वा न प वम ्

Foreign bodies, arrowheads which are lodged in the chest, axillae, groins and Flanks, which can
be cut and which have board blades should be pulled out.


Shalyas that should not be removed -
Those which lead to death soon after their removal, which are lost / invisible, which are absorbed
by the body and those which do not produce complications- should not be removed. 20-21


Aharana Vidhi- means and methods of removal

अथाहरे कर ा यं करे णेव इतर पुनः
  यं संहा हमकरव मककटकाननैः


           Page No. 321                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Those which can be held with the hand should be removed by the hand itself.
While others which are visible should be held by instruments such Simha- lion faced
Varmimukha- fish faced, karkata mukha –crab faced etc. 22

अ शयं    णसं थाना ग ृह तुं श यते यतः
क कभ ृ गा वकुररशरार वायसाननै ः

Those which are invisible but can be grasped by instruments, through the wound, should be
pulled out by instruments having faces like the Kankha – heron, Bhringa- Shrike, Kurara- osprey,
Sharari- a kind of heron and Vayasa –crow. 23

स दंशा यां वगा द थम ् ताला यां सु षरं हरे त ्
सु षर थं त ु नलैकः शेषं शेषैयथायथम ्

Those which are lodged in the skin should be removed with the help of Sandamhsa- Yantra
(forceps);
Those which are hollow, with the help of Tala Yantra- instruments with flat discs,
Those which are lodged in hollow spaces, by using Naraka Yantra- tubular instruments and the
rest by other convenient instruments. 24

श     ेण वा वश यादौ ततो नल हतं         णम ्
कृ वा घ ृतेन सं वे य ब    वा आचा रकमा दशे त ्

Those which cannot be held by instruments should be removed by cutting open the site with
sharp instruments, the wound is next cleared of the blood, soaked with ghee, fomented and then
bandaged;
The patient is advised to follow the prescribed regime – described in verses. 30-42 of the next
chapter. 25

सरा नायु वल नं तु चाल य वा शलाकया

Those lodged in the veins and tendons – including nerves, should be pulled out after loosing them
with the help of Salaka – rod like instruments.

 दये संि थतं श यं     ा सत य हमा बुना
ततः    थाना तरं   ा तमाहरे त यथायथम ्
यथामाग द ुराकषम ् अ यतो अ येवमाहरे त ्

If foreign body is in the chest (Hrudaya), patient should be sprinkled with ice water (himambu).
26-27

अि थद टे नरं प यां पीड य वा व नहरे त ्
इ यश ये सुब ल भः सुग ृह त य क करैः


         Page No. 322                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Foreign body, arrow head, lodged in the bones should be removed by holding the patient tight by
the legs of the physician, if not possible by this method, it should be pulled out by attendants who
are strong. 28

तथा अ यश ये वार गं व         कृ य धनु यया
सुब ं व    कटके ब नीया सुसमा हतः
सुसंयत य प चा       या वािजनः कशया अथ तम ्
ताडये द त मध
           ू ानं वे गेनो नमयन ् यथा
उ रे छ यम ्

If not possible even by that method, the tail end (feather tied end of the arrow) should be bent and
fastened tight to the string of a bent bow, and the bow tied to the bridle bit of a horse should then
be whipped so that it raises its head suddenly and with force by this method the arrow is
removed. 29-30

एवं वा शाखायां क पये तरो
ब   वा द ुबलवार गं कुशा भः श यमाहरे त ्

Likewise, the branches of trees may be made use of; in case of arrows with thin or fragile tail
ends, thin bamboo poles can be made use. 31

 वयथु     तवार गं शोफमु पी य युि ततः
मु गराहतया ना या नघा यो तुि डतं हरे त ्

If the tail end of the arrow is surrounded by an elevation, it should be pulled out after cutting off
the elevated part suitably; if the arrowhead has caused a bulging on the body, it should be
removed with the help of a Nadiyantra (tubular instrument) after shaking / hitting the bulging
with a hammer.32

तैरेव चानये मागममाग तुि डतं त ु यत ्
म ृ द वा क णनां कण ना या येन नग ृ य वा

By the hammer, the arrow which has no clear passage of exit, should be brought into a passage,
suitable for pulling out;
Those which have earlike projection should be pulled out after cutting off their ears or by fixing
them inside tubular instruments. 33

अय का तेन न कण वव ृता यम ृजुि थतम ्

The arrow heads without earlike projections, which have created a wide opening in the body and
lodged straight, can be removed by making use of a magnet.

प वाशयगतं श यं वरे केण व नहरे त ्


          Page No. 323                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Foreign bodies which have entered the large intestine can be removed by inducing purgations.
34

द ु टवात वष त यर ततोया द चूषणैः

Bad air- gas, poison, breast milk, blood, fluids etc. which are acting foreign bodies should be
removed by sucking by using animal horn (Shrunga) etc. 34 ½

क ठ ोतोगते श ये सू ं क ठे          वेशये त ्
बसेना ते ततः श ये बसं सू ं समं हरे त ्

If the foreign body has gone into the passage of the throat, a lotus stalk / sponge like portion, tied
with a thread should be passed into the throat, and when the foreign body gets stuck to the stalk,
the thread should be pulled out slowly. 35


ना या अि नता पतां         वाशलाकामि        थर कृताम ्
आनये जातुषं क ठात ् जतु द धामजातुषम ्

If the foreign body in the throat is made up of Lac, a heated iron rod should be passed through a
tubular instrument and made to touch the foreign body and then removed out; those which are not
made of Lac should be removed by making use of food smeared with Lac, at its tip. 36

केशो द ुकेन पीतेन    वैः क टकमा        पेत ्
सहसा सू ब ेन वमतः तेन चेतरे त ्

Thorn like, hook like bodies – which are in the throat should be removed by inserting a ball of
hair fastened with a thread, making the patient vomit the water which he has been made to drink
earlier, the foreign body sticking to the ball of hair during vomiting is removed by pulling the
thread quickly .
In the same way hair and other foreign bodies should be removed by making use of the hook. 37

अश यं मुखनासा यामाहतु परतो नुदेत ्

Those foreign bodies which are lodged in the mouth and nose, if not possible to be removed out
though respective orifices, should be pushed back, making them to enter into the wider tract. 38

अ पान क धघाता यां         ासश यं      वेशयेत ्

If a bolus of food is stuck up in the throat, it should be removed by using thread, cloth of flax,
silk, hair or water. 39

सू मा     णश या न       ौमवालजलैह रे त ्


          Page No. 324                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
The person who has swallowed water to his full stomach – by drowning should be held with his
head down and legs up and shaken well, on laid on the round with the face bent down and then
made to vomit all the water; he should then be immersed in heap of ash. 40

अपां पूण वधुनुय ादवाि शरसमायतम ्
वामये चामुखं भ मराशौ वा नखने नरम ्

If the ears are full with water, it should be removed inserting the finger and oil removers put into
the ears or the ears should be kept facing downwards and the head given the blow from the side.
Or the water can be sucked out with the help of tubular instruments 41

क टे    ोतोगते कणपूरये लवणा बुन ा
सू तेन वा सुखो णेन म ृते     लेदहरो व धः

If any insect has entered into ears, the ears should be filled with warm salt water or sour gruel
(Sukta), when the insect is dead, dehydration measures should be adopted or the ears should be
filled with water. 42

जातष
   ु ं हे म   या दधातज
                     ु ं च चरि थतम ्
उ मणा     ायशः श यं दे हजेन वल यते

Foreign bodies of Lac, and other metals remaining for long time inside the body get dissolved the
heat of the body. 43

मद
 ृ े वेणुदा श ृ गाि थद तवालोपला न च
वषाणवे वय तालदा श यं चराद प
 ायो नभु यते त        पच याशु पलासज
                                  ृ ी

Foreign body composed of Mud, Bamboo, wood, horn bone, tooth and hair of animals or man,
stone do not get dissolved by body heat;

Those composed of horn, Bamboo Iron, wood of palm tree or remaining for long periods inside
the body generally get distorted, remain un-dissolved and produce putrefaction in the muscles
and blood . 44- 44 ½

श ये मांसावगाढे चे स दे शो न वद यते
तत तं मदन वे दशु कषणबं ृहणैः
ती णोपनाहपाना नघनश          पदा गनैः
पाच य वा हरे छ यं पाटनैषणभेदनैः

If the foreign body is concealed deep inside fleshy parts, purification should be created in such
parts by squeezing, fomentation, thinning measures and smoothening therapies, use of strong,
hot poultices warm foods and drinks, incising and other methods, of sharp instrumentation,
trampling by feet etc. and then the foreign bodies removed by excision, probing or cutting. 45-46

          Page No. 325                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
श य दे शय     ाणामवे य बहु पताम ्
तै ते पायैम तमान ् श यं व या तथा आहरे त ्

Keeping in mind the different and peculiar features of the foreign bodies, their place of lodging
and instruments of removal, the intelligent physician should recognized them and remove them
by appropriate methods. 47- 47 ½


Thus ends the chapter named Salyaharana Vidhi- twenty eighth of Sutrasthana of Astanga
Hrurdaya.


          Page No. 326                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan