Chapter 26 Shastra Vidhi श                              व ध Uses of Sharp
Instruments

Let us explore various sharg surgical instruments used in Ayurveda. This is the 26th chapter of
Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta.
The chapter name Shastra Vidhi Adhyaya. Shastra means sharp surgical instrument.

Shastra means sharp surgical instrument.


Features of Sharp Instruments

ष वंश तः सुकमारैघ टता न यथा व ध
श      ा ण रोमवा ह न बाहु येन अ गुला न ष १
सु पा ण सुधारा ण सु हा ण च कारये त ्
अकराला न सु मात सुती ण आव तते अय स २
समा हतमुखा ा ण नीला भोज छवी न च
नामानुगत पा ण सदा सि न हता न च
 वो मानाध चतथ
            ु ाश फला न एकैकशो अ प च
 ायो     व ा ण,यु जीत ता न     थान वशेषतः
म डला ं व ृ प मु पला यधधारके
सपष यौ वे तसा यं शरय य कूचके
कुशा यं साटवदनम दव        ाध च    के कम ्
 ी हमुखं कुठार च शलाका गु लश         के
ब डशं करप ा यं कत र नखश          कम ्
द तले खनकं सू यः कूच नाम खजा यम ्
आरा चतु वधाकारा तथा       य कणवेधनी

Shastras- sharp instruments are 26 in number.

Shastras should be prepared from skilled metal smiths, as per traditional method of preparing
surgical instruments.

They should be generally six Angula (fingers breadth)- long, capable of splitting the
hair/shaving, good to look at, with sharp edges, good to hold firmly;

The Yantras should not be of ugly shape. They should be prepared from well blown – removed
of impurities strong steel like iron.


           Page No. 298                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
The front of their mouth. i.e – the shape edges well hammered – to make them sharp, having the
color of the blue lotus, with shape in accordance with their name, always ready at hand for use,
their blades- cutting edges being 1/4th, ½th or 1/8th of their own size (total length).
Each – instrument two or three in number should be made use as suitable to the place site of
operation. 1-4


Names of Shastras -

Mandalagra, Vriddhiptra, Uttpala Patra, Adhyardha Dhara, Sarpa Mukha, Eshani, Vetasa Patra,
Sarari Mukha, Trikurchaka, Kushapatra, Atavadana Atimukhi, Antrarvaktra, Ardha chandraka,
Vrihimukha, Kuthari, Shalaka, Anguli Shastra, Badisa, Karapatra, Kartari, Nakha Shastra, Danta
lekhanaka, Suchi, Koorcha, Khaja, the four kinds of Ara, and Karna vedhanaka- are the names of
the twenty six sharp instruments.

म डला ं फले तेष ां तज य तनखाकृ त
लेखने छे दने यो यं पोथक शुि डका दषु ५
वृ प ं    ुराकारं छे द भेद पाटने
ऋ व मु नते शोफे ग भीरे च तद यथा
नता ं प ृ ठतो द घ     वव    ं यथा यम ्
उ पला यधधारा ये भेदने छे दने तथा
सप यं    ाणकण अशः छे दने अधा गुलं फलम ्
गतेर वेषणे ल णा ग डूपदमुखैषणी
भेदनाथ अपरा सू चमुखा मूल न व टखा
वेतसं यधने      ा ये शरया य कूचके
कुशाटावदने    ा ये   वय गुलं    या तयोः फलम ्


1, Mandalagra Shastra- knife with round edge at its tip has its edge in the shape of nail of the
index finger, to be made use of for scraping and cutting-excision, in diseases like Pothaki- cyst in
the eyelid, Shundika- Tonsils etc. 5


2, Vridhipatra- Scalpel is shaped like a boarders knife- Razor, useful for cutting, excision,
splitting, incision and tearing/ separating, it, with a straight edge, is for use in elevated – bulging
swelling, the same with its tip bent backwards, long or short edge for use in deep seated swelling.
6


3, Utpalapatra and 4, Ardha dhara- lancets are for the purpose of splitting and cutting. 7
5, Sarpyasya- Sarpamukha- serpent bladed scalpel is meant for cutting – excision of polyps in
the nose and ears and has an edge of half Angula.


          Page No. 299                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
6, Eshani- sharp probe meant for exploring sinuses, is smooth and shaped like the mouth of an
earthworm. 8
Another kind of Eshani- probe meant for splitting, has its blade like a needle, with a slit- hole at
its root.

7, Vetasapatra is for puncturing;


8, Shararimukhi- shaped like a heron’s beak’s kind of scissors and


9, Trikuracaka – three spiked Brush like instrument are meant for draining out liquids. 9


10, Kushapatra- Razor resembling Blade of Kusha grass and


11, Atimukha- razor resembling the beak of a hawk are meant for draining, edge is two Angula
– in length.

त वद तमुखं त य फलम यधम गुलम ्
अधच     ाननं चैतत ्


12, Antramukha – is meant for draining, its edges – 1.5 Angula in length and Shaped like half
moon. 10

तथा अ यधा गुलं फले
 ी हव    ं    यो यं च ति छरोदरयो यधे


13, Vrihimukha- with blade like a grain of rice, its edge being one and half Angula- in length
and meant for Puncturing veins and the Abdomen. 11

पथ
 ृ ःु कुठार गोद तस ृशाधा गल
                          ु ानना
तयो वद डया व ये द ुपय       नां ि थतां सराम ्


14, Kuthari – Axe is thick, Stout, resembling a cow’s tooth, with edge of half Angula- in length
and having a wooden handle; from this the vein situated on bones should be cut leeping the
handle of this Axe vertically over it. 12

ता ी शलाका        वमुखी मुखे कु बकाकृ तः
ल गनाशं तथा व येत ्


             Page No. 300                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
15, Shalaka – rod made of copper, with two edges on either side shaped like the bud of
Kurabaka, meant for piercing the lens in Linganasa- Cataract couching. 13

मु का नगतमुखं फले       वधा गुलायतम ्
त     दे श य पव माणापणमु कम ्
सू ब ं     गल ोतोरोग छे दनभेदने


16, Anguli Shastra- finger knife is prepared so as to have an orifice.
Its edges are sharp, with its half Angula in width, resembling either Vriddhipatra or Mandalagra,
in shape, capable of permitting the entry of the first Phallange of the index finger, is tied to the
finger with thread and meant for excision and splitting of the diseases portion in diseases of the
passage of the throat. 14-15

    हणे शिु डकामादे ब डशं सन
                           ु ताननम ्


17, Badisha- sharp hook with a bent blade is meant for holding enlarged Uvula, Arma-
Pterygium etc.

छे दे अ    ना करप ं त ु खरधारं दशा गुलम ्
व तारे सू मद तं सु स ब धनम ्


18, Karapatra- saw is meant for cutting of the bone, should have strong edge, of ten Angula- in
length and width of two Angula, with fine- sharp, small teeth and with a handle to be held tight
with the fist. 16

 नायुसू कच छे दे कतर कतर नमा


19, Kartari- scissors meant for cutting tendons, threads, hairs etc, is like scissors – which is
commonly used by layman.

व जुधारं     वमुखं नखश      ं नवा गुलम ्
सू मश यो ृ त छे दभे द     छानले खने


20, Makhasa– Has cured or straight, edge, two bladed- shaped edge on both sides, nine Angula
in length, to be made use for removing minute foreign bodies, excision, splitting and scraping.
18

एकधारं चत ु कोणं     ब ाकृ त चैकतः
द तले खनकं तेन शोधये       तशकराम ्


           Page No. 301                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

21, Danta lekhanaka- dental lancet, has one edge four Angulas, Shaped like a knot on one side,
is meant for scrapping the tartar on the teeth. 19

व ृ ता गूढ ढाः पाशे त ः सू यो अ        सीवने
मांसलानां    दे शानां य ा यम गुलमायता
अ पमांसाि थसं ध था णानां         य गुलमायता


22, Soochi – needles for suturing/ swing is of three kinds; round, strong and sout; having –
passing in through a hole in their body near its root; that for use in fleshy parts will have three
edges and length of three Angula, for use in less flashy places, bony joints and wounds on joints,
with a length of two Angula. 20

 ी हव    ा धनुव ा प वामाशयममसु
सा साध      य गल
               ु ा

Vrihimukha Soochi- curved needle is bent like a bow, meant for use- sewing/ suturing of
instesties, stomach and vital spots and two and half Angula in length. 21

सवव ृ ता ता चतुर गुल ाः
कूच व ृ तैकपीठ थाः स ता टौ वा सब
                               ु धनाः
स यो यो नी लका य गकेशशातेषु कु ने


23, Koorcha - brush with sharp spikes with round spikes fixed on one end, for seven or eight
number and fastened well; it is used for scrapping in Nilika- blue patches, Vyangga- dark patches
on the blade and loss of hair etc.22

अधा गुलमुखैव ृ तैर टा भः क टकैः खजः
पा ण यां म यमानेन       ाणातेन हरे दस ृक्


24, Khaja- churner has blade of half Angula in length and is of round shape, with eight spikes-
fixed in it meant for removing the – vitiated blood from the nose by Churning with the hands. 23

 यधनं कणपाल नां यू थकामुकुलाननम ्


26, Karnapali Vyadhna- instrument for puncturing the ear lobe should have its blade in the
shape of bud of Yuthika- Jasmine. 24

आरा अधा गल
         ु व ृ त या त        वेशा तथो वतः
चत ुर ा, तया व ये छोफं प वामसंशये

            Page No. 302                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
कणपाल ं च बहलाम ् बहलाया च श यते
सच
 ू ी    भागसु षरः य गल
                     ु ा कणवेधनी

25, Ara- Awl, saw cutting plate has a round blade of half Angula below and four blades- edges
above, it should bee used for puncturing swellings in case of doubt whether it is ripe or urine, as
also – the earlobe which is thick. In case of thick earlobe a needle, hollow in three parts of it,
three Angula in length is best for puncturing. 25-26


Anu Shatra – Accessory instruments:-

जलौकः     ारदहन काचोपलनखादयः
अलौहा न अनुश       ा ण, ता येवं च वक पये त ् २७
अपरा य प य ाद युपयोगं च यौ गकम ्
Anushastras are -
Jalauka – Leeches,
Kshara – caustic Alkalies,
Dahana – fire,
Kacha – glass
upala –cow dung cake
nakha – nail
stone, nail etc, which are non-metallic.
Many other instruments may be designed as required for use in special operations and sites. 27


Shastra Karya – functions of sharp instruments-

उ पा यपा यसी यै यले य         छानकु नम ्
छे यं भे यं यधो म थो        हो दाह च ति      याः

Utpatana- extracting,
Patana- tearing / splitting,
Seevana- Suturing,
Eshana- probing,
Lekhana- scraping,
Pracehhana- Scratching, incising, minute puncturing
Kuttana- beating, hitting, pounding
Chedana – excising, cutting,
Bhedana- breaking,
Vyadhana- Puncturing,
Manthana- Churning,
Grahana- holding, grasping and
Dahana- burning, cauterizing are the functions of sharp instruments.28


          Page No. 303                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shastra Dosha – defects of sharp instruments:-

कु ठा ख ड तनु      थूल          व द घ व व ताः
श     ाणां खरधार वं अ टौ दोषाः        क तताः

Kuntha – Bluntness,
Khanda – brokenness,
Tanu- thinness,
Sthula – stoutness,
Hrsava – smallness,
Deergha – lengthiness,
Vakrata – curvedness, irregular shape
Kharadaratva – rough edge – are defects of sharp instruments.29


Shastragahana Vidhi:- Method of holding sharp instruments:-

छे दभे य ले याथ श        ं व ृ तफला तरे
तजनीय म यमा गु ठै           णीया सुसमा हतः व ावणा न व ृ ता े तज य गु टकेन च
तल      छ न व ृ ता े     ा यं    ी हमुखं मुखे
मल
 ू ेषु आहरणाथा न कृयासौकयतो अपरम ्

For Chedana (cutting), Bhedana (breaking) and Lekhana (scraping), the instrument should be
held in Vrunta phalantara- between round woods handle and the edge, with the help of index,
middle fingers and the thumbs, carefully;
for Visravana (draining), it should be held at the tip of the round wooden handle with the help of
the index finger and the thumb;

For Pracchanna (scorching, scratching), the tip of the handle should be held with the palm.
Vrihimukha Shastra should be held at is mouth tip;
for extracting, the instruments should be held at their root;
Others may be held in a convenient manner, as required in the operation. 30-32


Shastra Kosha- instrument wallet:-

 या नवा गुल व तारः सुघनो            वादशा गुलः
    ौमप ोणकौशेयद ुकूलम ृद ुचमजः
व य तपाशः सु यूतः सा तरोण थश                कः
शलाका प हता य च श           कोशः सुस चयः

The instrument wallet should be 9 Angula width, 12 Angula in length.
It should be made from jute, leaves, wood, silk, inner bark of trees or soft leather.
It should be endowed with threads, well stitched with compartment for instruments, which should
be kept wrapped in wool;
Its mouth closed and held tight with a rod- acting like a bolt and pleasing to look at. 33-34

           Page No. 304                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Jalauka- leeches-

जलौकस तु सु खनां र त ावाय योजयेत ्

Leeches should be made used of for letting out blood from happy persons
Leeches are born in dirty water contaminated by putrifying dead bodies of fish, frog and snake or
their excreta;

द ु टा बुम    य भेका हशवकोथमलो वाः
र ताः वे त भ ृशं कृ णा चपलाः      थूल पि छलाः
इ   ायुध व च ो वराजयो रोमशा च ताः
स वषा वजये त ् ता भः क डूपाक वर माः
वश प ता नुत ् काय त

Indrayudha type of leeches -
Red, white or very black in color;
Chapala – very active,
thick and slimy,

Poisonous Jalauka -
Those which have
Chitra – varied lines on their back, and
Urdhvaraji – which are very hairy are Savisha- poisonous and so should be rejected.
If used, they produce itching, ulceration, fever and giddiness, these- ailments are to be treated
with drugs which mitigate poison, pitta and blood. 35-36 ½


Nirvisha Jalauka – safe leeches -

श ु ा बज
       ु ाः पन
             ु ः
न वषाः शैवल        यावा व ृ ता नील उ वराजयः
कषाय प ृ टा ताः तनु अ       यः कि चत ् पीतोदरा च याः

Those born in clean water, which are blue, round in shape, having blue lines in their back, rough/
hard back, thin body, slightly yellowish belly are Nirvisha- non poisonous- so can be used. 37-38

ता अ प अस यक् वमनात ् ततं च नपातनात ्
सीदि तः स ललं       ा य र तम ता इ त यजेत ्

Even these, when they do not vomit the sucked blood fully, when they are applied frequently,
and when they are inactive even after getting into water, should be considered as blood
intoxicated and should be rejected. 39


             Page No. 305                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Jalaukavacharana- procedure of applying leeches:-

अथेतरा      नशाक कयु ते अ ब स प र लुताः
अवि तसोमे त े वा पन
                  ु चा चा सता जले
लागये ृतम ृ      त यर तश             नपातनैः
पब ती       नत     क धा          छादये मद
                                        ृ व
                                          ु ाससा

The leech that are kept for short time in water containing paste of turmeric / grain washed water
(Avantisoma)/ buttermilk should be made comfortable by putting back in pure water.
should be made to stick to the body of the patient.

The leeches are attracted to the desired part of the body, by rubbing the part with ghee, mud,
breast milk / blood or by making a wound with a sharp instrument.
When it starts drinking blood by raising its shoulders, it should be covered with a soft cloth.

स पृ     वात ् द ु टशु ा         ात ् जलौका द ु ताशो णतम ्
आद ते      थमं हंसः        ीरं      ीरोदका दव ४३ गु माश व धीन ् कु ठवातर तगलामयान ्
ने   ि वष वसपान ् शमयि त जलौकसः

Thus stuck up, the leech will suck only the vitiated blood first from the mixture of vitiated and
un-vitiated blood, just like the swan sucks the milk from a mixture of milk and water. 40-42


Application of Leeches mitigates diseases such as,
Gulma – Tumors of the abdomen
Arsha – Haemorrhoids,
Vidradhi – Abscess,
Kushta – skin diseases
Vatarakta – gout,
Galamaya,Netraruk – diseases of the neck and eyes,
Visha – poison,
Visarpa- herpes. Etc

दंश य तोदे क        वां वा मो ये त ् वामये च ताम ्
पटुतैला तवदनां शल णक डन षताम ्

When pricking pain or itching develops at the site of the bite, the leech should be removed; they
are then made to vomit the sucked blood by touching their mouth with salt and oil or by gentle
rubbing in the direction of their mouth after smearing fine rice flour over them. 43

र न ् र तमदा भूयः स ताहं               ता न पातयेत ्

After making them vomit they should be protected from blood intoxication and should not be
used again for seven days.


           Page No. 306                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
पूववत ् पटुता दा यं संय वा ते जलौकसाम ्
 लमोअ तयोगा म ृ युवा दव
                      ु ा ते       त धता मदः

After proper vomiting, the Leech regains its previous activity and becomes strong;
by too much of vomiting it becomes very weak or may even die;
If vomiting is improper, it becomes lazy, inactive and intoxicated. 44

अ य ा य ा ताः      था या घटे म ृ      ना बुग भ ण
लाला दकोथनाशाथ स वषाः         यु तद वयात ्

They should be transferred from one pot to another, filled with good mud and water, in order to
destroy- avoid putrefaction by saliva, excreta of leeches, because the Leeches become poisonous
with such a contact. 45

अशु ौ    ावयेत ् दंशान ् ह र ागुडमा    कैः ॥४६॥
शतधौता य पचव ततो लेपा च शीतलाः।

When in doubt of impurity, the site of the bite should be made to bleed by applying paste of
Haridra (Turmeric), Guda (jaggery) and honey.
Later a piece of cloth soaked in Shata Dhauta Ghrita or cooling pastes prepared from drugs of
cold potency should be applied – over the site.

द ु टर तापगमना स यो राग जां शमः

With the removal of vitiated blood, the redness and pain subside immediately. 47

अशु ं च लतं     थानि   थतं र तं       णाशये
 य ल भवे पयु षतं त मा त         ावये पुनः

The vitiated blood, displaced from its site and accumulating in the interior of the wound becomes
greatly sour by stagnating overnight; hence it should be expelled out again. 48

यु   यालाबुघ टकां र ते प तेन द ू षते
तासामनलसंयोगात ् यु      या तु कफवायुन ा

A gourd or pot (cupping method) should not be used to remove the vitiated blood when the blood
is vitiated by pitta, for they are associated with fire. It would further aggravate Pitta. They should
be used in case of vitiation by kapha and Vata imbalance. 49

कफेन द ु टं   धरं न श ृ गेण व नहरे त ्
सक न वात ् वात प ता यां द ु टं श ृ गेण नहरे त ्


          Page No. 307                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
The blood vitiated by Kapha should not be extracted by using a sucking horn (Shrunga) because
of thickness of the blood, whereas blood vitiated by Vata and pitta should be removed by the
sucking horn. 50
Shrunga is good for Vata and Pitta imbalance and not indicated in Kapha.
Ghata is good for Vata and Kapha but not for Pitta.

Pracchana – incising to produce bleeding:-

गा ं ब     वोप र      ढं र     वा प े न वा समम ्
 नायुस     यि थममा ण यजन ्              छानमाचरे त ्
अधोदे श व ुतैः पदै प रगा म भः
न गाढघन तयि भन पदे पदमाचरे त ्

The part of the body above the site, selected for bleeding should be tied tightly with a rope of
leather scrap;
Tendons, joints, bones and vital spots are avoided and Prachanna karma (scratching, incision) by
sharp scalpel done from below upwards.
It should not be done in horizontal direction.

     छानेनैकदे श थं      थतं जलज म भः
हरे छृ गा द भः सु तमस ृ या प शरा यधैः

Blood accumulated in any localized area- small area can be removed by Pracchana (scratching-
incisions);
Blood accumulated in tumors, abscess can be removed by using leeches;
Blood that has produced loss of sensation- at the site of accumulation by using the sucking horn
(shrunga) etc gourds or pot (Ghata) and
that which is soared all over the body by venesection. 55

     छानं पि डते वा          यात ् अवगाढे जलौकसः
 व     थे अलाबघ
              ु ट श ृ गं शरैव यापके असिृ ज
वाता दधाम वा श ृ गजलौकोलाबु भः             मात ्

Or removal of blood by incisions is done when the blood is solidified; by Leeches when it is deep
seated; by gourd, pot or horn when it is localized in the skin and by venesection when it is
pervading the entire body; by using horn, Leeches, gourd for the seats of Vata and others- Doshas
respectively.54 ½

 तास ृजः     दे हा यैः शीतैः      या वायुकोपतः
सतोदक डूः शोफ तं स पषो णेन सेचयेत ्

After the bleeding procedure, the site of bleeding should be covered with cooling paste.
This will reduce the pain, itching and oedeme at the site.
The area should be bathed with warm ghee. 55

Thus ends the chapter- Shastra Vidhi- the 26th in Sutrathana in Astangahridaya.


           Page No. 308                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan