Chapter 29 Shastrakarma Vidhi शा                                        कम व ध
Surgical Procedures

This chapter explains about different surgical methods and operations of ancient times. This i the
29th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi
Simhagupta. The chapter name is Shastrakarma Vidhi.

 णः स जायते      ायः पाकात ् वयथप
                                ु व
                                  ू कात ्
तमेवोपचरे त मा      न ् पाकं   य नतः १
सुशीतलेपसेका मो संशोधना द भः

Due to Paka (suppuration) of inflammation, Vranashotha (inflammatory ulcer) develops.
Hence, swelling should be treated first, preventing the formation of pus, by all efforts, such as
Susheeta lepa – application of cold poultices,
Seka – bathing the part with cold decoction of drugs,
Asramoksha – blood letting,
Samshodhana – Purifying Panchakarma therapies. 1.

Trividha Sopha – three stages of swelling :-
Shopha – Swelling is of three types.
Ama shopha – unripe, raw, initial stage, without pus formation
Pachyamana shopha – with symptoms of inflammation, initial stage of pus formation
Pakva shopha – with full pus formation.

 णः स जायते      ायः पाकात ् वयथुपूवकात ्
तमेवोपचरे त मा      न ् पाकं   य नतः
सश
 ु ीतलेपसेका मो संशोधना द भः

Ama shopha – (unripe swelling) mild with slight heat and pain, The swelling will have the same
colour as the skin. The swelling is immovable. 2.

प यमानो ववण तु रागी बि त रवाततः
 फुटतीव स न तोदः सा गमद वजिृ भकः
  यानं व य दय या यं        णव    पशनासहः

Pachyamana shopha -
Vivarna – The swelling gains a different color than that of the skin.
Ragi – it is usually red coloured.
Bastiriva – It enlarges like an animal bladder.
Nistoda – continuous bursting type of pain,
Angamarda – aches all over the body,
Vijrumbhika – excess of yawning,
Samrambha – different kinds of distressing symptoms,

          Page No. 327                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Aruchi – anorexia
Daha – burning sensation all over the body
Usha – increased temperature
Trut – excessive thirst
Jvara – fever
Anidra – loss of sleep,
quick melting of solid ghee placed on the swelling and
intolerance to touch – tenderness just as in an ulcer 3 – 4.


Pakva Shotha – ripe swelling is

प वे अ पवे गता     ला नः पा डुता व लस भवः
नामो अ तेषू न तम ये क डूशोफा द मादवम ्
 प ृ टे पूय य स चारो     भवे व ता ववा भसः

Alpavegata – mild in nature,
Mlani – reduced in size,
Panduta – white colour,
Valisambhava – has wrinkles on it,
depressed all round but elevated at its centre
Kandu – itching
Shopha – mild swelling,
Mardava –softness,
movement of pus can be understood by touch just as movement of water in a bladder. 5.


Doshawise symptoms in Shopha -

शूलं नत अ नलात ्, दाह: प तात ्, शोफ: कफोदयात ् ॥६॥
रागो र ता च पाक:       यादतो दोषै: सशो णतै: ।

Shula – pain due to Vata
Daha – burning sensation due to Pitta imbalance
Shopha – inflammation due to Kapha imbalance
Raga – redness and Paka – suppuration due to Rakta vitiation. 6.

पाके अ तव ृ ते अ तसु षर तनु व दोषभ         तः
वल भरा चतः यावः शीयमाणतनू हः

When pus formation further increases with lapse of time there is cavity formation inside the
swelling, the skin becomes thin and destroyed by the Doshas, it is covered with wrinkles, black in
colour and body hairs fall off. 7.

कफजेषु तु शोफेषु ग भीरं पाकमे यस ृक्
प व ल गं ततो अ प ृ टं य         या छ तशोफता

          Page No. 328                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
 व साव य      जो अ प वं घन पश वम मवत ्
र तपाक म त      य
                ू ा तं   ा ो मु तसंशयः

If the swelling produced by predominance of Kapha, ripening takes place slowly, hence signs of
ripening do not manifest clearly, the swelling which is cold to touch, of the same colour as of the
skin with milkd pain, hard to touch, like a stone. IT is also known as Raktapaka.8 – 9.


Shastra Karma Vidhi – Procedure of surgical operation:-

अ पस वे अबले बाले पाका वा अ यथमु ते
दारणं ममस     या दि थते चा य      पाटनम ्

In persons with weak mind, who are debilitated, in children, or when the swelling is elevated by
accumulation of pus, when it is located on vulnerable spots, joints etc., the treatment is

Darana – making the abscess burst by application of Alkalies (Kshara) whereas in other cases
except the above, the treatment is –

Patana - cutting open by sharp instruments. 10.

आम छे दे सरा नायु यापदो अ ुग त ु तः
 जो अ तव ृ दरणं वसप वा           तो वाः
त ठ न तः पुनः पूयः सरा ना वस ृगा मषम ्
वव ृ ो दह त       ं तण
                     ृ ो प मवा नलः

Cutting an unripe swelling leads to diseases of the veins and tendons, profuse bleeding,
immense pain, tearing of the skin or Visarpa (spreading ulcers).
The pus remaining inside and increasing in quantity, quickly burns away the veins, tendons blood
and muscles just as – spark of fire burns away a hay stack. 11 – 12.

यि   छन यामम ाना य च प वमुपे ते
 वपचा वव व ेयौ ताव नि चतका रणौ

The surgeon who by ignorance cuts open an unripe swelling and he who neglects a ripe swelling
– without cutting open – both should be considered as mean surgeons performing indiscriminate
acts. 13.


Purvakarma – Pre-operative procedures:-

 ाक् श    कमण चे टं भोजये द नमातुरम ्
पानपं पायये म यं ती णं यो वेदना मः


          Page No. 329                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
न मू छ य नसंयोगा म तः श           ं न ् बु यते

Before undertaking surgical opening of an abscess the patient should be given the food he likes;
The person accustomed to alcoholic drinks may be given a drink of strong wine which makes him
withstand the pain. 14 – 15.

अ य     मूढगभा ममुखरोगोदरातुरात ्

Except for those patients suffering from obstructed delivery, renal calculus, diseases of the mouth
and the abdomen – such patients should be given neither food nor wine before the operation.
15½.


Pradhana Karma – operation proper:-

अथा तोपकरणं वै यः       ा मुखामातुरम ्
संमख
   ु ो य     य वा आशु     य ये ममा द वजयन ्
अनुलोमं सु न शतं श      मापूय दशनात ्
सकृदे वाहरे त च

Next, keeping all the equipments required, the physician should make the patient sit facing east.
Sitting in front of him and facing him, the physician should incise the swelling with his well
sharpened instrument,
Incision being made in the direction of the hair – downward, avoiding vulnerable parts, deep
enough till the pus is seen, and then removing the instrument quickly. 16 – 17

पाके त ु सुमह य प
पातये त ् वय गुलं संय     वय गुल च गुला तरम ्
ए ष वा स यगे ष या प रतः सु न पतम ्
अ गुल नालवालैवा यथादे शं यथाशयम ्
यतो गतं ग त ं व याद ु स गो य        य    च
त   त      णं कुया सु वभ तं नराशयम ्
 ायतं च वशालं च यथा दोषो न त ठ त

If the area of pus formation is great, the incisions may be either one, two or three Angula –
(fingers breadth) apart;
The interior is then thoroughly excavated with either a probe, finger, tube or hairs of animals, as
appropriate to the site and area of the swelling,
The pus path is determined, cutting through the bulge of the wounds, creating a well cleaned,
wide and deep wound so that no vitiating material can remain inside. 18 – 20.


           Page No. 330                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
श      वै य ग ुण – Characters Desired in a Surgeon
शौय आशु        या ती णं श   ं अ वेद वेपथू ॥२१॥
अस मोह च वै य य श           कम ण श यते ।

Shaurya – Courage,
Ashukriya – quickness of action,
Teekshna shastra – keeping his instruments very sharp,
Asveda – not sweating
A vepathu – not trembling,
Asammoha – not getting confused
these are the qualities best desired of the 21.

तयि छ         या ललाट ूद तवे तकज ु ण
कु     क ा    कूटौ ठकपोलगलव      णे
अ य      छे दनाि तयक् सरा नायु वपाटनम ्

Tiryak Cheda – The incision should be made horizontally curved in places such as the forehead,
brows, gums of teeth, shoulders, abdomen, axillae, eye sockets, lips, cheeks, throat and groins;
horizontal incision, in other places might lead to cutting of the veins, tendons etc. 22 – 23.


Sastrakarmottara Vidhi – Paschat Karma – post-operative procedures

शा     े अवचा रते वाि भः शीता भो भ च
रो गणाम ्
आ वा य प रतो अ गु या प रपी य           णं ततः
     ाल य वा कषायेण लोतेन ा भो अपनीय च
गु गु वगु स ाथ ह गुस जरसाि वतैः
धूपये पटुष       था न बप ैघ ृत लुतैः
तलक का यमधु भयथा वं भेषजेन च
द धां व त ततो द या तैरेवा छादये च ताम ्
घत
 ृ ा तैः स तु भ चो व घनां कव लकां ततः
नधाय यु       या ब नीय प े न सुसमा हतम ्
पा व स ये अपस ये वा नाध ता नै व चोप र

After removing the sharp instruments, the patient should be comforted with encouraging words
and cold water;
The area all around should be squeezed,
The wound is washed with decoction of drugs
Moisture is removed by wiping with cotton wool.
The wound should be fumigated with the smoke of Guggulu, Aguru, Siddhartha, Hingu (Asa
foetida), Sarjarasa, Patu (Salt), Sadgrantha(Acorus calamus) or leaves of Nimba (neem), mixed
with ghee;
             Page No. 331                                         Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Then a wick prepared from paste of Tila, ghee, honey and appropriate drugs should be placed
inside the wound and also covered over.
A thick plaster prepared from corn flour and ghee is put on and bandaged with a thick sheet of
cloth, winding it either from right to left or left to right but not from either top or bottom. 24 – 28.

शु चसू म ढाः प ाः कव यः स वके शकाः
धू पता म ृदवः    ल णा नवल का        णे हताः

The bandage cloth should be clean, thin and strong; the medicinal wick should consist of cotton
threads which are fumigated, soft, smooth and devoid of folds, these are beneficial to the ulcers.
29.

कुव तान तरं त य र ां र ो न ष ये
ब लं चोपहरे ते यः
Ulcer should be protected from the invasion of bad evils (microbes), insects, flies which feed on
blood. They should be offered oblations. 30

सदा मू ना च धारयेत ्
ल मीं गुहाम तगुहां ज टलां       मचा रणीम ्
वचां छ ाम त छ ां द ुवा स ाथकाना प
ततः    ने ह दनेहो तं त याचारं समा दशेत ्
दवा व ने       णे क डूराग   शोफपूयकृत ्

The patient should always wear on his head, potent herbs such as Lakshmi, Guha, Atiguha, Jatila,
Brahmacharini, Vacha, Chatra, Atichatra, Durva or Siddharthaka.
He should be made to follow the regimen prescribed for the day of oil drinking as part of
Snehana therapy;
sleeping during day leads to production of itching, redness, pain, swelling and pus in the ulcer. 31
– 32.

   ीणां तु      ु तसं पशदशनै च लत ुते
शु े   यवायजान ् दोषानसंसग अ यवा नुयात ्

Remembrance, touch and sight of women, which produce ejaculation of semen leads to other bad
effects of intercourse, though not indulged into actually. 33.

 णे वयथुरायासात ् स च राग च जागरात ्
तो च    क् च दवा वापा ता च म ृ यु च मैथुनात ्

Swelling gets increased in an ulcer by strenuous activities,
Redness increases by keeping awake at night,
Pain by sleeping during day;
death occurs by indulging in copulation.


             Page No. 332                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Diet after surgery –

भोजनं च यथासा      यं यवगोधूमषि टकाः
मसरू मु गतव
          ु र जीव तीसु नष णकाः
बालमूलकवताकत डुल यकावा तुकम ्
कारवे लककक टपटोलकटुकाफलम ्
सै धवं दा डमं धा ी घ ृतं त त हमं जलम ्
जीणशा योदनं ि न धम पमु णोदको तरम ्
भु जानो जा गलैमासैः शी ं      णमपोह त

The food of the patient should be that which is accustomed such as barley, wheat, rice of sixty
day ripening (shashtika shali), Masura – lentil, Mudga (green-gram), Tuvari – (tur dal), Jivanti,
Sunisannaka, tender Mulaka (Radish), Vartaka, Tanduliyaka, Vastuka, Karavella (biiter gourd),
Karkota, Patola (Pointed gourd) , Katukaphala – fruit of Katurohini, Saindhava (Black salt),
Dadima (pomegranate), Dhatri (Amla), Ghrita (ghee), water boiled and cooled.
Mess prepared from old rice added with fats consumed in little quantity along with meat of
animals of desert – like regions, followed by drinking of warm water helps for the quick healing
of ulcers. 34 – 36.

अ शतं मा या काले प यं या त जरां सुखम ्
अजीण व नलाद नां व मो बलवान ् भवेत ्
ततः शोफ जापाकदाहानाहानवा नय
                          ु ात ्

Food, to be consumed in limited quantity at the appropriate time and which is healthy, undergoes
digestion properly, Indigestion by over eating etc. leads to disorders of Vata and other Doshas
which might be powerful so as to cause increase of swelling, pain, putrefaction, burning sensation
and distention of the abdomen. 37 – 38.


Food to be avoided –

नवं धा यं तलान ् माषान ् म यं मांसमजा गलम ्
 ीरे ु वकृतीर लं लवणं कटुकं यजेत ्
य चा यद प व टि भ वदा ह गु           शीतलम ्
वग अयं नवधा या द णनः सवदोषकृत ्

Fresh grains, Tila (sesame), Masha (black gram), wines, meat other than of animals of desert like
regions, products of milk and sugarcane, substances which are sour, salt and pungent should be
avoided;
Any other substance which causes constipation, burning sensation during digestion, which are not
easy to digest and which are cold in potency;
This group of substances gives rise to aggravation of all the Doshas in persons suffering from
ulcers. 39 – 40.


         Page No. 333                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
म यं ती णो ण        ा लमाशु यापदये         णम ्

Strong penetrating, hot wines, with high percentage of alcohol, dry – non-unctous and sour,
quickly cause death of the patient of ulcers. 40½.

वालोशीरै च वी ये त न ् चैनं प रघ येत ्
न तुदे न च क डूयेचे टमान च पालयेत ्
ि न धव ृ    वजातीनां कथाः श ृ व मनः          याः
आशावान ् या धमो ाय            ं    णमपोह त

The ulcer site should be fanned either with tuft of hairs of animals or with that of Ushira
(Vetiver) grass.
It should not be beaten, poked, or scratched with nails, it should be protected from injury while
doing other activities;
The person who engages himself in hearing pleasant stories, meeting with virtuous elderly
persons of the twice born castes (Brahmin), he who is hopeful of cure of the disease gets rid of
the ulcer quickly. 41-42.

त ृतीये अि न पुन ः कुया   णकम च पूववत ्
     ालना द, दवसे    वतीये नाचारे तथा
ती    यथो व    थति चरा संरोह त        णः

On the third day, the same treatment such as washing the ulcer etc. are done, as explained earlier;
These should not be done on the second day as that will give rise to severe pain, formation of
tumors and delayed healing of the ulcer. 43 – 44.

ि न धां      ां शलथां गाढां द ु य तां च वके शकम ्
 णे न द या क कं वा        ने हा     लेदो वव ते
मांस छे दो अ त      ौ या रणं शो णतागमः
शलथा तगाढद ु यासै णव मावघषणम ्

The wick of cotton threads smeared with paste of drugs and also the paste of drugs should neither
be very unctuous (oily) nor very dry; neither flabby nor very thick – hard and should not be
improperly placed;
Because unctuousness (oily, fatty) increases moistness,
dryness causes tears in the muscles, severe pain, lacerations and bleeding.
Flabby, hard and improperly placed wick produces friction of the edges of the ulcer. 45 – 46.

सपू तमांसं सो स गं सग त ं पूयग भणम ्
 णं वशोधये छ ं ि थतः              य त वके शका

When the medicinal wick remaining long inside the ulcer produces putrefaction of the muscles,
elevated surface, loss of tissues and accumulation of pus inside, then the ulcer should be cleaned
– cleared of its contents quickly. 47.

           Page No. 334                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

 य लं तु पा टतं शोफं पाचनैः समप
                              ु ाचरे त ्
भोजनै पनाहै च ना त ण वरो ध भः

When an unripe swelling has been cut open by ignorance it should be treated with foods and
poultices which bring about ripening but which are not very opposed / harmful to the ulcer. 48.


Sadyovrana Chikitsa – treatment of traumatic wounds -

स यः स यो णान ् सी य वव ृतान भघातजान ्
मेदोजांि ल खतान ्     थीन ्     वाः पाल च कणयोः
शरो  कूटनासौ टग डकण बाहुषु
 ीवाललाटमु कि फ मे पायूदरा दषु
ग भीरे षु दे शेषु मांसले वचलेषु च

Traumatic wounds which are recent and wide should be sutured immediately;
So also the ulcers which are made by scraping fatty tumors, Pinna of the ears which are thin,
ulcers located on the head, eye-sockets, nose, lips, cheeks, ears, arms neck, forehead, scrotum,
buttocks, penis, rectum, abdomen etc which are situated on important fleshy and immovable parts
should be sutured. 49 – 50.


Wounds that should not be sutured immediately -

न तु व    णक ादाव पमांसे चले         णान ्
वायु नवा हणः श यगभान ्         ार वषाि नजान ्

That are on groins, axilla, etc, which are less muscular and movable, ulcers which emit air (gas),
which have foreign body inside, which are produced by alkalies (kshara), poisons and fire should
not be sutured. 51.

सी ये चाि थशु का त ृणरोमापनीय तु
 लि ब मांस वि छ नं नवे य            व नवेशने
स     यि थ च ि थते र ते       ना वा सू ेण व कलैः
सी ये न द ूरे नास ने ग ृ      ना पं न वा बहु

Suturing should be done only after removing loose pieces of bones, dried blood clots, grass, hairs
etc; by placing the torn and hanging pieces of muscles in their proper places, keeping the joints of
bones and bones fractured in their normal positions and after the stoppage of bleeding; by making
use of tendons of animals, threads of cotton, silk, flax etc. or inner fibres of bark of trees;
Suturing being done neither very far apart nor very close, holding neither very much of the
tissues nor very little. 52 – 53½.


          Page No. 335                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
सा व य वा तत चात           णे मधुघ ृत ुतैः
अ जन ौमजमषीफ लनीश लक फलैः
सरो मधुकै द धे यु       या ब धना द पूववत ्

After suturing, having comforted the patient with encouraging words, cold water drink, fanning
etc. the ulcer should be covered with cotton swab soaked in a mixture of honey, melted ghee,
Anjana – Srotonjana, ash of Ksyauma (flax), Phalini, fruit of Shallaki, Rodhra and Madhuka;
then bandaging and other measures done as described previously. 54 – 55.

 णो नः शो णतौ ठो यः कि चदे वाव ल य तम ्
स जात धरं सी ये स धानं          य य शो णतम ्

The edges of the ulcer which are not bleeding should be scraped a little to induce bleeding and
sutured when the blood is flowing; for the blood is the cause – agent for healing of the ulcers. 56.


Bandhana – bandages:-

ब धना न तु दे शाद नन ् वी य यु जीत तेषु च
आ वकािजनकौशेयमु णं,         ौमं तु शीतलम ्
शीतो णं त ूलस तानकापास नायुव कजम ्
ता ाय    पुसीसा न       णे मेधः कफा धके
भ गे च यु     या फलकं चमव ककुशा द च

Bandages suitable to the site of the ulcer / organs of the body should be made use of.
Among them, that prepared from sheeps skin, and silk is hot.
Bandage from flax is cold,
that from silk-cotton, cotton, tendons of animals – aponeuroses, sheaths, thin layers of tendons
etc. and bark of trees is both hot and cold;
wounds which have more of fat and Kapha, should be covered with thin sheets of copper, iron,
zinc, or lead; so also the fractures;
In case of fractures bandaging should be done by using leather, bark of trees and splints – hard
and flat pieces of bamboo, wood, metal etc. 57 – 58.

 वनामानुगताकारा ब धा तु दश प च च
केश वि तकमु तोल चीनदामानुवेि लतम ्
ख वा वब ध थ गका वतानो स गो फणाः
यमकं म डला यं च प चा गी चे त योजये त ्
वद या तेषु ते वेव कोशम गल
                        ु पवासु
 वि तकं कणक ा द तेनेषू तं च सि धषु
मु तोल ं मे   ीवादौयु     याचीनमपा गयोः
स बाधे अ गे तया दाम, शाखा वेवानुवेि लतम ्

          Page No. 336                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ख वां ग डे हनौ श खे, वब धं प ृ ठकोदरे
अ गु ठा गू लमे ा े       था गकाम        व ृ षु
वतानं प ृथुला गादौतथा शर स चेरये त ्
वलि ब न तथो स गं, नासौ ठ चबुका दषु
गो फणं सि धषु तथा, यमकं य मकं              णे
व ृ ते अ गं म डला यं च , प चा गीं चो वज ुषु
यो य    सु न व टः       या तं तेषां त    बु मान ्

Bandages are of the same shapes implied in their very names and are fifteen in number; they are
Kosha, Swasthika, Muttoli, China, Dama, Anuvellita, Khatva, Vibandha, Sthagika, Vitana,
Utsanga, Gosphana, Yamaka, Sthagika, Mandala and Panchangi;
Kosha kind should be used for the joints of fingers,
Swastika for the ears, Axilla etc. for breasts and joints;
Mittoli for the penis, neck etc.;
China for the outer canthus of the eyes;
Dama at places of junction of body parts such as groins etc.;
Anuvellita for the extremities,
Khatva for cheeks, lower jaw and temples;
Vibandha for the back and abdomen;
Sthagika for the thumb, fingers, tip of the penis, and in hernia in the groins;
Vitana for organs which are thick and also for the head;
Utsanga for hanging parts;
Gosphana for the nose, lips, joints etc;
Yamaka for places having two adjacent ulcers;
Mandala for parts which are round;
Pancangi for parts above the shoulders.
An intelligent physician should apply, that type of bandage which is most suitable to the place of
the body. 59 – 61.


Tight bandage –

ब नीया गाढमू ि फ क ाव             णमूधसु
शाखावदनकण रः प ृ ठपा वगलोदरे
समं मेहनमु के च, ने े सि धषु च लथम ्
ब नीयाि छ थल थाने वात ले मो वे समम ्
गाढमेव सम थाने , भ ृशं गाढं तदाशये
शीते वस ते अ प च तौ मो णीयौ               यहा यहात ्
प तर तो थयोब धो गाढ थाने समो मतः
सम थाने लथो, नैव श थल याशये तथा
सायं ात तयोम        ो   ी मे शरद प चे यते


         Page No. 337                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Bandage should be tied tight over the thighs, buttocks, axillae, groins, and head; it should be
moderate over the extremities, face, ears, chest, back, flanks, neck, abdomen, penis and scrotum;
On places which are even neither hard nor flabby it should be tight, it should be very tight if the
ulcer is situated on the seats – organs of Vata and Kapha.

Moderate tight bandage - it should be moderate over the eyes, joints etc;
so also on places which are flabby, on places where the ulcer has been produced by Vata and
Kapha it should be moderate, bandage should be removed once in three days during Sita – cold
and Vasanta (spring) seasons.

Loose bandage – Bandage should be tied moderately tight on hard parts if the ulcer on them are
produced by Pitta and Rakta, and on even-parts, it should be loose; on places where loose
bandaging is prescribed, it should not be tied at all; during Grisma – summer and Sarat – autumn
bandage should be removed in the evening and morning. 62 – 65½.

अब ो दंशमशकशीतवाता दपी डतः
द ु ट भवेि चरं चा     न त ठे    नेहभेषजम ्
कृ    े ण शु   ं   ढं वा या त   ढो ववणताम ्

If the ulcer is not bandaged, it gets contaminated by the bite of mosquitoes, cold breeze etc., the
fats and medicines applied to the ulcer do not stay on, the ulcer requires long time to become
clean without pus etc. and get healed, and even after healing it will be discoloured the skin over
the area does not get back the normal colour of the body. 66 – 67.

ब     तु चू णतो भ नो वि ल टः पा टतो अ प वा
छ न नायु सरो अ याशु सख
                     ु ं संरोह त             णः
उ थानशयना यासु सवहासु न पी यते
उ व ृ तौ ठः समु स नो वषमः क ठनो अ त क्
समो म ृद ुर क् शी ं     णः शु   य त रोह त

Bandaging helps easy and quick healing of wounds in which the bones are found crushed or
fractured, joints are dislocated, which are cut up by the physician, in which tendons and veins are
severed, by bandaging there will be no pain during getting up, lying down and such other acts;
swelling of the part of the body which are either uneven, hard and very painful or even soft, and
painless – all become clean and heal quick. 69.

ि थराणाम पमांसानां रौ यादनुपरोहताम ्
     छा यमौषधं प ैयथादोषं यथतु च
अजीणत णाि छ ैः सम ता सु नवे शतैः
धौतैरककशोः         ी रभुजाजुनकद बजैः

Ulcers which are persisting long, which have very little of muscular tissue, which do not heal to
dryness absence of moisture should be applied with medicines which are wrapped in leaves of
trees, appropriate to the Doshas involved and the seasons; the leaves should not be ripened ones


           Page No. 338                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
but should be young – tender ones, not having holes, good in all respects, washed well and not
rough, should belong to trees which have milky sap, Bhurja, Arjuna or Kadamba. 70 – 71.


Bandaging contra indication –

कुि ठनामि नद धानां प टकामधुमे हनाम ्
क णका चो द ु वषे      ारद धा वषाि वताः
ब धनीया न मांसपाके ग ुदपाके च दा णे
शीयमाणाः स      दाहाः शोफाव था वस पणः

Bandaging should not be done for ulcers which are of leprosy or burns by fire, of diabetes
mellitus, of rat bite, burnt by alkalies, caused by poison, which have putrefaction of the muscles,
severe ulcerations of the rectum, which are degenerating with loss of tissues which have pain and
burning sensation, which retain the swelling over long period and which spread to other parts. 72
– 73.

अर या      णे यि मन ् म    का न      पे कृमीन ्
ते भ य तः कुवि त         जाशोफा सं वान ्
सुरसा दं   यु जीत त      धावनपूरणे
स तपणकर जाक न बराजादन वचः
गोमू ोकि कतो लेपः सेकः        ार बुना हतः
     छा य मांसपे या वा    णं तानाशु नहरे त ्

Flies deposit worms – bacteria etc. inside the ulcers which are not protected by bandaging, they –
bacteria by devouring the tissues produce pain, swelling and bleeding; for washing and filling of
such septic ulcers the drugs of Surasadigana – vide chapter 15 should be Rajadana prepared with
cows urine should be applied, bathing the ulcer with solution of alkalies is beneficial or
scarification of the muscle tissues, by these measures the worms – bacteria etc. should be
removed out quick. 74 – 76.


न चैनं वरमाणो अ तः सदोषमप
                        ु हारयेत ्
सो अ पेना यपचारे ण भूयो वकु ते यतः

Hasty healing of the ulcer which has residue of the Doshas inside, should not be attempted; for it
will flare up greatly even with slight improper regimen. 77.

 ढे अ यजीण यायाम यवायाद न ् ववजये त ्
हष     ोधं भयं चा प यावदा थैयस भवात ्
आदारे णानव
         ु य अयं मासान ् ष        स त वा व धः


           Page No. 339                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                         Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Even after the ulcer has healed the patient should avoid indigestion, physical activities,
copulation etc; great rejoicing, anger, fear etc. till he attains his full strength, he should lead a
disciplined life for at least six or seven months. 78 – 79.

उ प यमानासु च तासु तासु वातासु दोषा दबलानुसार
तै तै पायैः   यति च क सेदालोचयन ् व तरमु तरो तम ्

Such other conditions which manifest should be managed with methods appropriate to the
strength of the Doshas etc., in the light of the details furnished on the Uttara Tantra – the last
section of this treatise (vide chapter 25 – 27) 80.


Thus ends the chapter named Shastrakarma Vidhi – 29th of Sutrasthana of Astangahridayam.


          Page No. 340                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan