Chapter 17 Swedana Vidhi Sudatuin Therapy /
Sweating

We are explaining Swedana procedure in this chapter. Swedana refers to sweating or sweating
therapy. The term sweda means sweat. The patient is made to sweat on purpose. Usually this
procedure is done after doing the oleation therapy (Snehakarma), that we studied in the last
chapter.


Kinds of sweating treatments – Swedana Prakara

    वेद तापोपनोहो म वभेदा चतु वधः

1. Tapa- fermentation,
2. Upanaha- warm poultice,
3. Ushma- warm steam and
4. Drava – pouring of warm liquid.


Tapa Sweda

तापोअि नत त वसनफालह ततला द भः

Tapa Sweda is done by touching the affected part of the body with heated cloth, metal plate,
forhead, Palm of the hand etc. 1

Upanaha Sweda

उपनाहो वचा क वशताहवादे वदा भः
धा यैः सम तैः ग धै च रा ना एर ड जटा मषैः

Upanaha Sweda is application of poultice prepared from
Vacha (Acorus calamus), Kinva-yeast, Shatahva (Dill),
Devadaru – (Himalayan cedar (bark) – Cedrus deodara) etc. any kind of grains, all substances
having pleasant smell, roots of Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) and Castor (Eranda); or meat;

उ      तलवणैः    नेहचु त पयः लुतैः
केवले पवने , ले मसं ु टे सरु सा द भः
प तेन प का यै तु सा वणा यैः पुनः पुनः

each one added with more of salt, fats-oil ghee etc. Chukra- Vinegar, Takra-Buttermilk and milk.
in increase of vata associated with sleshma / kapha drugs of सुरसा द / surasaadi gana, in increase
of vata associated with pitta drugs of padmakadi / प का द    gana

           Page No. 215                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
It is preferred in people with Vata imbalance–poultice are known as Salvana upanaha and should
be applied often. 2-3

ि न धो ण वीय म ृद ु भ चम प ै रपू त भः
अलाभे वतिज प कौशेया वकशाटकैः

After applying the poultice, the part of the body should be bandaged with soft piece of leather
which does not have bad smell, which has been oiled; it should be slightly warmed and tied;
If leather is not available, leaves of plants which balance Vata, silk cloth, or woolen cloth may be
used;

ब धं रा ौ दवा मु चे मु चे ा ौ दवाकृतम ्

poultice tied during night should be removed during day and that tied during day should be
removed during night.4-5


Ushma Sweda-

ऊ मा तू का रकालो ट कपालोपलपांसु भः
प भ गेन धा येन कर ष सकतातष
                         ु ैः
अनेकोपायस त तैः      यो यो दे शकालतः

Here the steam of the hot substance is directed towards the body part. Steam may be obtained by
Utkarika- (boiling grains, pulses, seeds etc).
Stones, pebbles, mud, leaves pieces, grains, dried dung of animals like cow, Sheep, Goat etc,
Sand, Husk etc are also used for this purpose. 6-7 a


Drava Sweda –

श व
  ु ारणकैर डकर जसरु साजकात ्
शर षवासांवशाक मालती द घव ृ ततः
प ंम गैवचा यै च मांसै चानूपवा रजैः
दशमूलेन च प ृथक् स हतेवा यथामलम ्
 नेहव   ः सुराशु तवा र ीरा दसा धतैः
कु भीगल तीनाडीवा पूर य वा       जा दतंम ्
वाससा अ छा दतं गा ं ि न धं स चे यथासुखम ्

Warm liquid is prepared by boiling bits of leaves of drumstick, Varanaka ,Eranda – (Castor –
Ricinus communis), Karanja, Surasa, Arjaka, Shireesa, Vasa , Vamsha, Arka, Malati (Jasmine) or
Dirghvrinta, with drugs of vachadigana – vide chapter 15, meat of animals of Marshy land and of
those living in water, drugs of Dashamula, each one separately or all together, mixed with fats –


          Page No. 216                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
oil, ghee etc. appropriate to the Dosha;

Sura- beer, Sukta- fermented gruel, water and milk.

This medicated liquid should be filled into pot, jug with spout, or a tube and poured slowly and
steadily over the painful part covered with cloth. 7b-10

तैरेव वा   वैः पूण कु डं सवा गे अ नले
अवगा य आतुरि त ठे दशः कृ          ाद           च

In case of Vata affecting the entire body, the same- medicated water may be filled into tub and
the patient made to sit in it, this method can be adopted in piles, Dysuria etc.11


Swedavidhi – procedure of Sweating therapy:-

नवाते अ तब ह ि न धो जीणा नः                 वेदमाचरे त ्
 वेदमाचरे त ्

Sweating should be administered to him who has been given Snehana- both internally- by
drinking fats and externally- anointing oil over the body, who is staying in a room devoid of
breeze and after his meal has been completely digested. 12 a

 या ध या धतदे स ऋतु वशान ् म           वरावरम ्

Sweating may be mild, moderate or strong depending upon the condition of the disease, Patient,
habitat and season. 12b

कफात        णं      ो,

Person suffering from diseases of Kapha should be given sweating treatment in dry condition-
without the use of fat internally and externally and with dry liquid – without addition of fats;

   ः ि न धं कफा नले

In case of Kapha and Vata- increased together the patient should be in dry condition and liquid
mixed fats – should be used for sweating. 13 a

आमाशयगते वायौ कफे प वाशया              ते
   पूव तथा       नेहपूव   थानानुरो धतः

When vata is localized in the Amashaya- stomach dry sweating should be given.
When Kapha is localized in Pakvasaya- (intestines), oil-sweating should be given. 13b-14 a

अ पं व      णायोः    व पं    क् मु क     दये न वा

Sweating should be very mild / nil over the groins and also on the eye, scrotum and heart. 14b

           Page No. 217                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Benefits of sweating treatment – care to be taken - Swedana phala and Upacana –:-

शीत शूल       ये ि व नो जाते अ गानां च मादवे
 यात ् शनैः म ृ दतः   नात ततः     नेह व धं भजेत ् १५

Diminution of cold and pain and softness of the organ accrue from Sweating. After wards the
body should be massaged slowly, given bath –in warm water and allowed comfort s as prescribed
in lubrication therapy.15


Ati Swedana phala – effects of excess Sweating :-

प ता कोप त ृ मू छा         वरा ग सदन      माः
सं धपीडा     वरः यावर त म डल दशनम ् १६

Aggravation of Pitta and vitiation of blood,
thirst, loss of consciousness, weakness of voice and body,
Bhrama – Delusion, Dizziness
Sandhipeeda – pain in the joints ,
Jvara – fever, appearance of black- blue, red patches on the skin, and vomiting are produced by
excess of Sweating therapy;
For that , Stambhana treatment should be done. It is the same procedure, useful in diarrhoea and
bleeding disorders.


Treatment of AtiSwedana :

 वेदा तयोगात ् छ द च, त        त भनमौषधि वष        ाराि न अ तसार छ द मोहातरु े षु च
त    त भनमौषधम ्

Withholding, stopping, hindering of elimination is the treatment, so also for patients suffering
from poison, caustic Alkali and Barding by free; Diarroea, vomiting and unconsciousness 16-17


Qualities of Svedana and Stambhana Dravyas:

 वेदनं गु    ती णो णं     ायः, त भनम यथा
 वि थरसरि न ध           सू मं च भेषजम ्
 वेदनं , त भनं ल णं            सू म सर वंम ्
 ायि त तं कषायं च मधरु ं च समासतः

Generally substances which are heavy, penetrating and hot in potency are used Swedana therapy.
Substances of opposite are used in Sthambhana (withholding ,hindrances to elimination)
Drugs which are liquid, sthira – static, mobile, unctous, dry and penetrating bring about sweating.
Those which are smooth, dry, thin, mobile and liquid, bitter, Astringent and sweet in taste are
generally Stambhana 18-19

            Page No. 218                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
 ति भतः      या बले ल धे यथो तामयस           यात ्

Stambhana is useful in diarrhoea and bleeding disorders therapy, With this treatment, the person
gains Strength and gets relieved of symptoms of excess sweating disappear. 20a


Symptoms of excess Sthambana –

 त भ वक्      नायुस कोच क प त ् वा हनु हैः
पदौ ट व करैः यावैः अ त ति भतमा दशे त ्

Contraction of skin and tendons, tremors, stiffness of region of heart, choking of voice, locked
jaw, black discoloration of the feet, lips, skin and hands. 20-21a


ASwedayah – persons Unsuitable for Sweating:-

न     वेदयेत ् अ त थूल    द ुबलमूि छतान ्
 त भनीय त ीण ामम य वका रणः
त मरोदरवीसपकु ठशोषाढयरो गणः
पीतद ु धद ध नेहमधून ् कृ त वरे चनान ्
    टद धगुद ला न ोधशोकभया दतान ्
    ु त ृ णाकामलापा डुमे हनः प तपी डतान ्
ग भणी पुि पतां सूतां , म ृद ु च अ य यके गदे

Atishoola
Atirooksha – highly dry
Durbala – weak, debilitated
Murchita – fainted, unconscious
Those who are fit for Sthambhana treatment,
Kshataksheena – wounded, injured
Patients with Ama condition,
Madyavikari – chronic alcoholics
Night blindness,
Visarpa – herpes
Kushta
Shosha – emaciated
who have recently consumed milk, curds, fat,
Who have just undergone Virechana treatment
Who are burnt,
Who are tired, suffering from anger, grief, fear, excess tirst, hunger,
Kamala – liver diseases
Pandu – anemia
Meha – urinary disorders
People with Pitta imbalance.


           Page No. 219                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
women who are pregnant, menstruating – during periods and delivered – recently . in case of
emergency diseases , it should be done mildly – for the above. 21-24


Persons who deserve Swedana – Svedyah-

 वासकास त याय ह मा मान वबि धषु
 वरभेदा नल या ध ले माम त भगौरवे
अ गमदकट पा वप ृ ठकु       हनु हे
मह वे मु कयोः ख यामायामे वातक टके
मू ाकृ   ाबुद ि थशु ाघाताढयमा ते
 वेदं यथायथं कुयात ् तदौषध वभागतः

Shwasa – dysnoea, COPD, Asthma
Kasa – cough,
Pratishyaya – running nose, allergic rhinitis
Hidhma – hiccup,
Adhmana – bloating
Vibandha – constipation
Svarabheda – altered voice, hoarseness
Vatavyadi – diseases of Vata imbalance
Angamarda – bodyache
stiffness in lower back, flanks, back, abdomen and jaws
enlargement of the scrotum, contractions of toes and fingers, tetanus sprains, dysuria, Malignant
tumor- cancer, bening tumor, obstruction to the flow of semen and urine, and Adhyamaruta-
Thigh stiffness. 25-27


Anagni Sweda – Sweating without fire source –

 वेदो हतः तु अना नेय ो वाते मेदः कफाव ृते
नवातं ग ृहमायासो गु     ावरणं भयम ्
उपनाहहव ोधो भू रपानं      ुधा आतपः

Sweating without source of fire is suitable in diseases of vata enveloped by Medas and Kapha.
Nivata sadana – Staying in air tight room,
Ayasa – stressful physical activity,
Gurupravarana – covering oneself with thick blankets
Bhaya – fear,
Upanaha – bandaging wrapping with cloth etc.
Fighting, wrestling
Krodha – anger
Bhuripana – excess drinking of water
Kshudha – withholding hunger
Atapa – Sun exposure – 28-29a


         Page No. 220                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Sweda phala – Effects of Sweating :-

 नेहि ल नाः को ठगा धातुगा वा         ोतोल ना ये च शाखाि थसं था
दोषाः   वे दै ते   वीकृ य को ठं नीताः स यक् शु      भः नि नय ते

Doshas which have been lubricated by oleation therapy, residing either in the alimentary tract,
tissues, or lurking in the channels of the extremities bones etc are liquefied by Sweating therapy,
brought into the alimenantray canal to be eliminated out of the body completely, by appropriate
purification therapies.

So, sweating is done after oleation, but before elimination of Doshas by Panchakarma. 30


Thus ends the chapter Swedavidhi- the Seventeenth of Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita.


          Page No. 221                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan