Chapter 24 Tarpana Putpaka Vidhi तपण -पुटपाक व ध

Let us learn about two main Ayurveda eye care treatments – Tarpana and Putapaka, their
indication, uses etc. This is the 23rd chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by
Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is Tarpana Putapaka vidhi
Adhyaya. Tarpana and Putapaka refers to two eye treatment methods.


Tarpana Vidhi- procedure of Tarpana therapy:-

नयने ता य त      त धे शु के     े अ भघा तते
वाता प तातुरे िज मे शीण प मा वल णे १
कृ   ो मील शराहष शरो पात तमोजुनैः
 य दम था यतोवात        पयायशु कैः २
आतुरे शा तरागा ु शूल संर भ द ू षके

Indications for Tarpana eye care procedure:
When the eyes are fatigued, stiff, dry, rough or injured;
in patients of increase of Vata and Pitta;
when there is irregularity – Asymmetry or loss of eye Lashes,
in clouded unclear vision;
in patients of – diseases like
Krchronmilla –difficulty in opening eyes
Shiraharsha, Shirotpata – redness and hemorrhage
Tama – darkness in front of eyes
Arjuna,Syanda, Mantha, Anyato Vata, Vataparyaya, and Sukraka;
After relief from redness lacrimation, pain, swelling and exertions.


तपण यो य / Those Fit for Tarpana Therapy

नवाते तपणं यो यं शु योः मू काययोः
काले साधारणे    ातः सायं    वो तानशा यनः

शु योः मू काययोः. - who have purified both head by nasya and body by vamana,
virecana and vasti
काले साधारणे. - temperate season
both in ातः / morning and सायं / evening
 ायं वो तानशा यनः - lying with his face upwards
नवाते -    in room devoid of breeze


          Page No. 283                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Tarpana procedure -

The patient should undergo purification of head – Nasya treatment and also purification of body –
Vamana and Virechana.
Time for Tarpana can be either morning or evening.
The patient is lying with his face upwards in a room devoid of breeze. 1-3 ½

Procedure

यवमाषमयीं पाल ं ने कोशात ् ब हः समाम ्
 वय गल
     ु ो चां     ढां कृ वा यथा वं स मावपेत ्

A wall is constructed with the paste prepared from Yava (barley) and Masha (black gram)
around eye socket –resembling a well to a height of two Angula –finger breadth.

स प नमी यते ने े त ता भु        वला यतम ्

Keeping the eyelids closed, medicated herbal ghee, which is liquefied by heating in hot water
bed, should be poured into the well up to the level of tips of the eye lashes.


Condition for Using Vasa (Muscle Fat) instead of Ghee

न ता     य वात त मर कृ        बोधा दके वसाम ्

In diseases like Naktandhya (night blindness), Vatatimira, Krichradodha etc. muscle fat should be
used instead of ghee.

अप मा ात ् अथो मेषं शनैक त य कुवतः

The patient should then be asked to open his eyes slowly and retain the drug .


Matrakala- time required to utter a soft syllable should be counted up to

मा ा वगणये त       व म सि ध सता सते
  टौ च     मशो याधौ शतं        ीण च प च च
शता न स त चा टौ च , दश म थे , दशा नले
प ते ष , व थव ृ ते च वलासे प च चारयेत ्

100 – for the diseases of Vartma – eye lids
300 – for the diseases of Sandhi – fornices
500 – for the diseases of Sita – sclera
700 – for the diseases of Asita – cornea
800 – for the diseases of Drishti – pupil, retina etc.
1000 – for the disease Adhimanta

          Page No. 284                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
1000 – for the disease caused by Vata imbalance
600 – for diseases caused by Pitta,
500 – for healthy person and for diseases of Kapha imbalance.
These are the time for retaining the drug.

कृ वापा गे ततो        वारं    ने हं पा े नगोलयेत ्
 पबेत च धूमं , ने ेत योम             पं च भा वरम ्

After the stipulated time, the ghee should be removed through a hole done at the outer canthus
The person should be given Dhumapana (herbal smoking)
The person is advised not to look at the bright sky or bright objects.


Tarpana days -

इ थं       त दनं वायौ , प ते वेका तरं , कफे
  व थे च      य तरं द        यादा िु तरे त योजये त ्

Tapana therapy should be done daily in diseases of Vata,
On alternative days in diseases of Pitta,
with an interval of two days for the healthy persons and in diseases of kapha,


Symptoms of excess or less Tarpana – Tarpana Atiyoga, Ayoga Lakshana –

  काश मता        वा    यं वशदं लघु लोचनम ्
त ृ ते ,

Prakasha Kshamata – Ability to withstand bright light
Good eye health
Vishada – clarity in vision
Laghu lochana – lightness in eyes are the symptoms of good Tarpana procedure.

 वपययोअ ु ते

Opposite of these are the symptoms of inadequate Tarpana and अ ु ते ले मजा जः
appearance of disorders of Kapha imbalance is the symptom of Excess Tarpana. 4-11


Contraindication

तपणं पुटपाकं च न यानह न योजये त ्

Tarpan and Putpaka should not be administered to those who are unfit for nasya.


            Page No. 285                                            Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Pathya - apathya

याव यहा न यु जीत          व ततो हतमांभवेत ्
मालतीमि लकापु पैब ा ो नबसेि नशाम ्

Those who have undergone tarpana and putapaka should adhere to - healthy foods and
activities for double the number of days of these therapies; during nights, he should bind the eyes
with a pad of flowers like malati, mallika etc.


Putapaka Vidhi- Procedure of Putapaka:-

 नेहपीता    तनु रव    ला ता    ि ट ह सीद त
तपणान तरं त मात ्           बलाधानका रणम ् १२
पुटपाकं    यु जीत पूव ते वेव य मसु

Just as the body becomes fatigued after Snehana therapy (drinking fats), eyes become fatigued
after Tarpana therapy; In order to restore the strength to the eyes, Putapaka therapy should be
done in diseases mentioned earlier. 12


Types of Putapaka –

स वाते     नेहनः, ले म स हते लेखनो हतः
 क् दौब य अ नले प तेर ते        व थे    सादनः

Snehana putapaka (with fat) – for Vata imbalance disorder.

Lekhana Putapaka (scraping type) – for Vata – Kapha imbalance disorder.

Prasadana Putapaka (soothing) – in weakness of the eyes, vision, in disorders of Vata Pitta and
Rakta and for the healthy person. 13


Putpaka Dravyas

भूशय सहानूपमेदोम जवसा मषैः
 नेहनं पयसा प टैःजीवनीयै च क पयेत ्

Snehana Putapaka is done by making use of fat, marrow, muscle fat and juice of meat of
animals which live in burrows (Bhushaya), which bite (Prasaha) – cut their food, cow, horse, ass
etc, and those which live in Marshy lands (Anupa), or with drugs of Jivaneeya gana- (chapter
15) macerated with milk- 14


           Page No. 286                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
म ृगप        य ु मांसमु ताय ता सै धवैः
 ोतोजराश खफेन आलैलखानं म तक
                          ु ि कतैः

Lekhana Putapaka is by making use of Mastu (whey), water of yoghurt macerated with the
paste of liver of animal and birds, pearls, ash of iron and copper, Saindhava- salt, Srotonjana
(Antimony sulphide), Shankha (ash of conch shell), Phena- (sea foam), cuttlefish and Ala
(orpiment ). 15

म ृगप        यकृ म जवसा    ु दया मषैः
मधुरैःसघत
        ृ ैः      त य ीर प टैः सादनम ्

Prasadana Putapaka is by the use of cow milk / breast milk macerated with the liver, marrow,
Muscle fat, Muscle of intestines and heart of animals and birds and drugs of sweet taste, and
mixed with ghee. 16


Putapaka Kalpana – preparing the recipe-

ब वमा ं पथ
         ृ क् प डं मांसं भेषजक कयोः १७
उ बूकवटा भोजप ैः           ने ह दषु   मात ्
वे ट य वा म ृदा ल तं धवध वनगोमयैः १८
पचे     द तैः अ याभं प वं न पी य त सम ्
ने े तपणवत ् यु        यात ्

The meat of animals and drugs should be made into balls of size of Bael fruit or of 1 pala (48
grams).
The balls should be wrapped in leaves of Urubuka, Vata or Amboja, Smeared with fats, and given
a coating of mud.
After they become dry, they are placed inside the fire, of wood of Dhava or Dhavana or of dried
crow dung and cooked till the balls become fire like red in appearance.
After they cool off, the paste of drugs is taken out and juice extracted from it.
The juice should be used for Tarpana procedure, as explained above.


Maatra Kala

शतं     वे     ी ण धारयेत ्
लेखन नेहना ये षु

The juice should be retained for a period of 200 – 300 Matra Kala. 200 for Snehana and
Lekhana. 300 for Prasadhana.


              Page No. 287                                           Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Temperature of Drug

को णौ पूव , हम अपरः

Juice should be Lukewarm for the Snehana and Lekhana and cold for Prasadana.

धूमपः अ ते तयोरे व

At the end of the Snehana and Lekhana types, Dhumpana (medicated smoking) is indicated. 19

योगा त    च त ृि तवत ्

The signs and symptoms of proper, inadequate or excess of Putapaka therapy are similar to those
mentioned under Tarpana therapy. 20

तपणं पुटपाकं च न यानह न योजये त ्

Both Tarpana and Putapaka therapies should not be administered to those who are unfit for
Nasya.

याव यहा न यु जीत         व ततो हतमांभवेत ्
मालतीमि लकापु पैब ा ो नबसेि नशाम ्

The patient who has undergone Tarpana and Putapaka therapies should adhere to healthy foods
and activities for double the number of days of Nasya therapy. During nights he should bind the
eyes with a pad of flowers like Malati, Mallika (Jasmine varieties).21

सवा मनां ने बलाय य नं कुव त न या जनतपणा यैः
 ि ट च न टा      व वधं जग च तमोमयं जायत एक पम ् २२

All out efforts should be made to strengthen the eyes by following Nasya, Anjana, Tarpana etc,
for once the vision is lost the different types of things of the world will all become one types of
thing – darkness. 22


Thus ends the chapter Tapana Putapaka Vidhi- the twenty-fourth of Sutrasthana in
Astangahrudaya Samhita composed by Srimad Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidhyapati Simhagupta.


          Page No. 288                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan