Chapter 19 Vasti Vidhi व ती वि त व ध – Enema
Therapy

This chapter explains the procedure of Basti treatment. Basti in general means enema therapy.
This is the 19th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, called as Basti Vidhi Adhyaya, written
by Sri Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidyapathi Simhagupta.


वातो बणेषु दोषेषु वाते वा वि त र यते
उप माणां सवषां सो अ णीि           वध तु सः १
न हो अ वासनं बि त           तरः

Basti is described for diseases with
imbalanced Doshas having predominance of Vata or
for diseases with Vata imbalance alone,
It is the best among all treatments.

It is of three kinds- viz

Niruha also known as Asthapana Basti Decoction enema decoction mixed with salt, honey,
ghee etc is administered.

Anuvasana also known as snehabasti ghee, oil, fat etc are administered. Herbal oils such as
Narayana Taila, Herbal ghritas are more commonly used for this purpose.

Uttarabasti administered through urethral route. 1

Notes- Basti means urinary bladder. In ancient times urinary bladder of animals like buffalo etc
were used as a bag to hold the enema material like decoctions, oil etc.


Persons suitable for decoction enema -Asthapya Asthapana Arha

तेन साधयेत ्
गु मानाहखुड ल हशु ातीसारशू लनः
जीण वर त यायशु ा नलमल हान ्
व मा मर रजोनाशान ् दा णां चा नलामयान ्

Patients suffering from
Gulma – Tumors of the abdomen
Anaha – bloating, fullness
Khuda – gout,
Pleeha Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly

          Page No. 235                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                  Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shuddha atisara – Diarrhoea unassociated with other diseases
Shula pain abdomen
Jeernajwara - Chronic fever
Pratishyaya rhinitis
Shukra, Anila, Mala Graha – obstruction of semen, flatus and constipation,
Vardhma – enlargement of the scrotum,
Ashmari Urinary calculi,
Rajonasha – Amenorrhoea and
grevious diseases of vata origin. 2-3


Unsuitable for Niruha – Asthapana Anarha – Anasthapyah

अना था या    व ति न धः      तोर को भ ृशं कृशः
आमा तसार व ममान ् संशु ो द तनावनः
 वासकास से काश ह मा माना पव         यः
शन
 ू पायःु कृताहारो ब ि छ ोदकोदर
कु ठ च मधुमेह च मासान ् स त च ग भणी

Atisnigdha whu have had excess of oleation therapy;
Urakshata - Chest injury
Krusha – highly emaciated,
Ama Atisara – diarrhoea, dysentery due to Ama or diarrhea of recent onset,
Vami – vomiting,
Samshuddha – who have undergone purification therapies (Panchakarma),
Datta Navana – who have been administered nasal medication
Shvasa COPD, Asthma, Dyspnoea
Kasa – cough, cold
Praseka excessive salivation
Arsha – Hemorrhoids
Hidhma – Hiccups
Adhmana Adbominal bloating
Alpavahni- low digestion strength
Shunapayu Swelling in the rectum
Kruta Ahara Who have just taken food
Badhodara intestinal obstruction
Chidra Udara Intestinal rupture
Udakodara Ascites
Kushta – skin diseases
Madhumeha diabetes
Pregnant woman in the seventh month. 4-5


         Page No. 236                                             Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Patients suitable for Anuvasana Basti Anuvasana Arha – Anuvasya

आ था या एव च अनुवा या वशेषाद तव             यः
   ाः केवलवाताताः

Person suitable for Asthapana are suitable for oil enema (Anuvasana).
Especially those who have strong digestion power, who are dry not undergone Snehana
therapy and those suffering from diseases of vata. 6


Patients not suitable for Anuvasana – Nanuvasyh Anuvasana Anarha

नानुवा या त एव च
ये अना था या तथा पा डुकामलामेहपीनसाः
नर न ल ह व भे दगु को ठकफोदराः
अ भ यि दभ ृश थूल कृ मको ठा यमा ताः
पीते वषे गरे अप यां ल पद गलग डवान ्

Persons unsuitable for oil enema are all those
unsuitable for decoction enema, those suffering from
Pandu – anemia,
Kamala – Jaundice,
Meha – diabetes, urinary tract disorders
Peenasa – rhinitis
Niranna on empty stomach
Pleeha Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly
Vid bhedi – diarrohea,
Guru koshta – hard bowels- constipated,
Kaphodara – Kapha type of Ascites
Abhishyandi a type of eye disorder
Bhrusha Sthula – profound obesity,
Krumi Koshta – Intestinal worm infestation
Adhyamaruta – gout;
Who have consumed poison, those suffering from artificial poison, goiter, filariasis and scrofula.
7-8


Bastinetra enema nozzle-

तथो तु ने ं हे मा दधातुदावाि थवेणुजम ्
गोपु छाकारमि छ ं ल णजु गु लकामूखम ्

Enema nozzle should be made from metals like gold, silver, wood, bone or bamboo;
Gopuchhakara – resembling the tail of the cow in shape,
Achidra – without holes (except at the ends), smooth, straight and with
Gulikamukha – tip shaped like a pill. 9

         Page No. 237                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ऊने अ दे प च, पूण अि म नास त यो अ गुला न ष
स तमे स त, ता य टौ         वादशे , षोडशे नव
 वादशैव परं वंशा ी य वषा तरे षु च
वयोबलशर रा ण       माणम भव येत ्

For children less than 1year of age, nozzle should be five angula- fingers breadth of Patients own
finger in length;
1 – 7years of age, it should be 6 angula;
7 year it should be 7 Angula,
12 years 8 Angula
16 years 9 Angula
20 years and onwards it should be 12 Angulas only.
These measurements may be slightly increased for those of other age groups based on age,
strength and body build. 10-11

 वा गु ठे न समं मूले      थौ येना े क न ठया
पूण अ दे अ गुलभादाय तद ा           व     तम ्
 य गुलं परमं छ ं मूले अ े वहते तु यत ्
मु गं माषं कलायं च ि ल नं कक धुकं               मात ्

Its orifice at its root should be 1 Angula in diameter for children of one year of age.
Diameter of the orifice should be increased by ½ angula for different age groups and its
maximum is 3 Angula diameter.
At its tip, the orifice should allow free movement of soaked Mudga (green gram), Masha (black
gram), Kalaya (round pea) and seed of Karkandhu Jujube respectively. 12-13

मल
 ू ि छ     माणेन       ा ते घ टकक णकम ्
व या अ े प हतं, मूले यथा वं       य गुला तरम ्
क णका वतयं ने े कुयात ्

Near the office at its root, a Karnika- ear-like ridge of this same size of the orifice should be
constructed - at the time of preparing the nozzle, another second Karnika- ridge should be made
at a distance of two Angula- towards its tip, the orifice at the tip should be kept closed- with a
plug of cloth.14-15.


Basti Putaka- Enema bag:-

त    च योजये त ्
अजा वम हषाद नां बि तं सुम ृ दतं        ढम ्
कषायर तं नि        छ     ि थग ध सरं तनम
                                      ु ्
    थतं साधु सू ेण सुखसं था यभेषजम ्
ब    यभावे अ कपादं वा       यसे वासो अथवा घनम ्

          Page No. 238                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

Urinary bladder of goat, sheep, buffalo or other animals was used as enema bag. The bladder
should be sturdy, well beaten, made red by tanning with astringent substances.
The bladder should be devoid of holes, hard spots.
It should not be torn.
To such a bladder, big end of the nozzle is adjusted and tied with threads.
If the bladder is not available, skin of thigh and legs of animals or thick cloth may be utilized for
making the bag. 15-17

Niruha Matra (quantity of medicine for decoction enema):-

न हमा ा      थमे    कु चो व सरे परम ्
 कु चव ृ ः     य धं याव ष        ुता ततः
 स ृतं व येद ू व   वादशा टादश य तु
आस तते रदं मानं , दशैव      स ृताः परम ्

For a child upto 1 year age, the decoction enema quantity is 1 prakuncha = 1 Pala = 48g.
For each succeeding year it should be increased by 1 pala till it becomes six Prasruta- 12 pala
=576g;
So for a 12 year old, the quantity is 12 Pala.
Further on it should be in increased by one Prasruta (2 Palas= 96 g). Each year till it becomes
twelve Prasta- 24 Palas=1152g.
At the 18 years, it is 24 Pala.
18 – 70 years – 24 Pala.
After 70 years, 10 Prasruta = 20 Pala = 960 grams / ml18-19


Anuvasana Matra- quantity for oil enema:-

यथायथं न ह य पादो मा ा अनुवासने

The quantity for oil enema should be one fourth of the quantity of that of decoction enema, as
prescribed for each age group. 20


Anuvasana Vidhi procedure of fat Enema:-

आ था यं      ने हतं ि व नं शु ं ल धबलं पुनः
अ वासनाह व ाय पूवमेवानुवासयेत ्
शीते वस ते च दवा रा ौ के च ततो अ यदा
अ य त नातमु चता पादह नं हतं लघु
अि न ध       म शतं सानुपानं    वा द च
कृतच     मणं मु त व मू ं शयने सुखे


          Page No. 239                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
ना युि      ते न चो छ ष सं व टं वामपा वतः
स को य द        णं सि थ     साय च ततो अपरम ्

The person suitable for decoction enema should be administered Snehana (oleation) and sweating
therapy followed by purification therapy- emesis or purgation.
After he regains strength, determining that he is fit for oil enema, he should be given an oil
enema first. The following procedure is adopted.
During cold season (Hemanta and Shishira Ritus) and Vasanta (spring) it should be given during
day in other seasons during night.
He should be given oil massage and bath, then accustomed food, less by one fourth of the usual
quantity; satiable, light- easily digestible neither with more of fats nor very dry, followed by an
after-drink of appropriate liquid.
Next he should walk for some time, eliminate faeces and urine and lie on a comfortable cot,
neither too high nor too low, on his left side, folding his right thigh, and extending the left thigh.
20-23

अथा य ने ं      णये ि   न धे ि न धमुखं ग ुदे
उ     वा य ब तेवदने ब े ह तमक पयन ्
प ृ ठवंशं    त ततो ना त त
                        ु वलि बतम ्
ना तवे गं न वा म दं सकृ दे व     पीडयेत ्
सावशेषं च कुव त वायुः शेषे ह त ठ त

Next, the enema nozzle which is Lubricated, after the air inside the bag is expelled out,
confirming that it is well fastened to the nozzle, it should be pressed without shaking the hands,
in the direction of the vertebral column, neither too fast nor too slow, neither with great force nor
with low pressure but in one attempt, a little quantity of liquid material be allowed to remain in
the bag. 24-26

द ते तू तानदे ह य पा णना ताडयेि        फजौ
त पाि ण यां तथा श यां पादत च                ि   पेतत ्
ततः      सा रता ग य सोपधान य पाि णके
आह या मुि टना अ गं च           नेहेन ा य य मदये त ्
वेदनात म त      नेहो न ह शी ं नवतते
यो यः शी ं नव ृ ते अ यः        ने हो अ त ठ नकायकृत ्
द ताि नं वागत नेहं साया ने भोजये लघु

After the administration and removing the nozzle the person should be placed with his face
upwards, his buttocks beaten gently by by the hands of the physician, then by patients own heels;
the foot of the cot should be lifted up thrice;
Next he must lie extending the entire body, with a pillow under his heels, oil should be smeared
all over the body and all the parts of it beaten with fist or massaged, concentrating on the painful
areas of the body, so that the fat enema liquid inside the rectum does not come out soon.


            Page No. 240                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
If it comes out soon, another oil enema should be administered immediately because fat which
does not remain inside does not serve the purpose. If the person has good digestive activity, and if
the fat comes out after the stipulated time he can be given light food in the evening. 27- 29 ½.

नव ृि तकालः परम       यो यामा ततः परम ्
अहोरा मुपे ेत , परतः फलव त भः
ती णैवा वि त भः कुया य ं        नेह नव ृ तये

The maximum time for the fat to come out is three Yama- nine hours; after that, it can be awaited
for one day and night; later on, after 24 hours after administration, attempt should be made to
remove it by force, with the help of rectal suppositories made from fruits or strong decoction
enema. 30-31

अ तरौ यादनाग छ न चे जा या ददोषकृत ्
उपे ेत ैव ह ततोअ यु षत च नशां पबे त ्
 ातनागधा या भः को णं, केवलमेव वा

If it does not come out due to severe dryness inside and does not produce any troubles like
lassitude etc. it should be neglected and allowed to remain inside for the night;
Next morning he is made to drink warm water either processed with ginger and coriander or
plain. 32

अ वासये तत
         ृ ीये अि न प चमे वा पन
                              ु च तम ्

Again he should be given fat enema on the third or fifth day, or till the fat gets well digested;


To whom fat enema can be given daily?

यथा वा    नेहपि तः     यादतो अ यु बणमा तान ्
 यायाम न यान ् द ता नीन ्        ां च   तवासरम ्

Those who have profound increased of vata, who do exercises- Physical activities daily, who
have good digestive power and those who are very dry can be given fat enema daily. 33-34

इत    नेहैि   चतुरैः ि न धे    ोतो वशु ये
न हं शोधनं यु      यादि न धे     नेहनं तनोः

After 3 – 4 such fat enemas if the body is found to be well lubricated, purification decoction
enema should be administered next, to clear the channels, if not well lubricated, fat enema only
should be continued. 35


          Page No. 241                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Niruha Basti Vidhi- Procedure of decoction enema:-

प चमे अथ त ृतीये वा दवसे साधके शुभे
म या ने कि चदाव ृ ते         यु ते ब लम गले
अ य त वे दतो स ृ टमलं ना तबुभु        तम ्
अवे य पु षं दोषभेषजाद न चादरात ्
बि तं     क पये वै य त व यैब हु भः सह

On the fifth or third day- after fat enema, at an Auspicious time, some time after midday, after
performing Auspicious rites, after oleation and Sweating, after elimination of wastes- urine,
faeces after not taking a heavy meal after a light meal ., after carefully considering the nature of
the person patient, the Doss, Drugs etc, the physician, accompanied by many experts of the
enema therapy, should administer decoction enema to the patient. 36- 37 ½


Nirahadraya Kalpana preparation of enema decoction:-

 वाथये वंश तपलं         य या टौ फला न च
ततः      वाथा चतुथाशं   नेहं वाते   क पयेत ्
प ते     व थे च ष ठांशम टमांशं कफे अ धके
सव      चा टमं भागं क का व त वा यथा
ना य छसा         ता ब तेः पलमा ं गड
                                  ु य च
मधुप वा दशेषं च यु      या

20 Pala- (960 g) of Drugs- enumerated in the prescription and
8 Madana Phala fruits should be made into a decoction with the 16 parts of water (15.360 liters)
and boiled down to 1/4th quantity; Thus, 3.840 liters of decoction will be obtained.
To the decoction, is added a fat- oil, ghee etc in
1/4th quantity = 960 g, for treatment of Vata,
1/6th quantity = 640 g for the treatment of Pitta,
1/8th quantity = 480 g for healthy person and for the treatment of Kapha disorders.
The quantity of Kalka (Paste) of some Drugs to be added to the decoction for all Doshas and the
healthy person shall be 1/8th part of the decoction (480 g) neither too thin nor too thick after
mixing.
Next one pala (48 g) of Guda- Molasses/ jaggery and appropriate quantity of honey and salt also
are also added.

सव तदे कतः
उ णा बुकु भीबा पेण त तं खजसमाहतम ्
        य ब तौ     णये पायौ ना यु णशीतलम ्
ना ति न धं न वा         ं ना तती णं न वा मद
                                          ृ ु
नात छसा      ं नोना तमा ं नापटु ना त च
लवणं त वद लं च
           Page No. 242                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
All these are then mixed together, churned well with a churner and made warm by keeping its
container either in hot water or by steam from a pot.
It should then be filled into the enema bag in that condition, which is neither too hot nor too cold,
neither too fatty nor too dry, neither too strong nor mild, neither too thick nor too thin, neither too
much nor too less in quantity, neither with too much of salt nor with it is then pushed into the
rectum. 41-43

पठ य ये तु त वदः
मा ां     प लकां कुया   ने हमा    कयोः प ृथक्
कषा ं मा णम थ य          व थे क कपल वयम ्
सव वाणां शेषाणां पला न दश क पये त ्

Some other experts of enema therapy say that the quantity of fats- oil, ghee and honey should be
three pala (144 g) individually;
Quantity of Manimantha (Saindhava salt) for healthy will be half a Karsha – 6 grams, the Kalka-
paste of drugs be two Pala 96 g and of all the other liquids put together shall be 10Pala- 480 g.
44-44 ½

मा      कं लवणं    नेहं क कं     काथ म त    मात ् ॥४५॥ यावपेत न हाणामेष संयोजने व धः।

Honey, salt, fat, paste and decoction are to be mixed in successive order, one after the other;
This shall be the method of mixing the materials for decoction enema. 45 ½

उ तानो द तमा े तु न हे त मना भवेत ्
कृतोपधानः स जातवेग चो कटकः स ज
                             ृ ेत ्

After receiving the enema, the patient should lie with his face upward with a pillow under his
head, mentally intent of the enema; after getting the urge he should eliminate the faeces sitting on
his heels. 46

आगतौ परमः कालो मुहूत म ृ येव परम ्
त ानुलो मकं       नेह ारमू ा लकि पतम ्
 व रतं ि न धती णो णं बि तम यं           पीडये त ्
व ा फलव त वा         वेदनो ासना द च

The maximum time for decoction enema material to come out is one Muhurta- 48 minutes,
after that period it may be fatal;

Hence another purgative enema prepared with fats, Alkalies, Urine of animals like the cow and
sour substances and possessing unctuous, Penetrating and hot properties should be administered
immediately; or a rectal suppository prepared from fruits should be made use of;
Sweating therapy and frightening should also be resorted to, to induce defecation. 47-48 ½


           Page No. 243                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
 वयमेव नव ृ ते तु        वतीयो बि त र यते
तत
 ृ ीये अ प चतथ
             ु अ प याव वा सु न ढता

If the materials comes out on its own accord, then second, third or fourth enema can be given or
as many as required till he developed symptoms of proper enema therapy. 49

व र तव च योगाद ि व यात ्

The symptoms of bouts of decoction enema therapy are similar to those of purgation therapy. 49
½

योगे तु भोजयेत ्
को णेन वा रणा      नातं तनुध वरसौदनम ्
वकारा ये न ढ य भवि त            चलैमलैः
ते सुखो णा बु स त य याि त भु तवतः शमम ्

After the appearance of the decided symptoms, the patient should take a bath with warm water,
and eat rice mass along with juice of animals of desert- like land. The complications of decoction
enema caused by the circulating Malas Doshas will subside by warm water bath and food.

अथ वाता दतं भूयः स य एवानुवासयेत ्

If the patient becomes troubled by increased Vata he should be given a fat enema immediately on
the Same day. 50-52

स य घीना तयोगा च त य           युः   ने हपीतवत ्

The symptoms of proper, inadequate and excess- decoction enema therapy are the same as those
of Snehana (drinking of fat) therapy.


Signs of good Anuvasana basti Procedure –

कि चत ् कालं ि थतो य च सपुर षो नवतते ॥५३॥ स अनुल ोम अ नल:                  नेह: तत ् स ं
अनव
  ु ासनम ् ।

Enema material – fat coming out along with faeces after staying inside for a short time, followed
by flatus moving down are the symptoms of proper fat enema therapy .53

एकं   ीन ् वा बलासे तु    नेहब तीन ् क पये त ्
प च वा स त वा प ते, नवैकादश वा अ नले
पुन ततो अ ययु मां तु पुनरा थापनं ततः


         Page No. 244                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                    Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
1 – 3 fat enema (Anuvasana) should be administered for the treatment of Kapha dominant
diseases.
5 – 7 for Pitta,
9 – 11 for Vata.
Again on uneven alternative days- third, Fifth, seventh etc. decoction enema should be given. 54-
55

Note – Always, Niruha Basti = decoction enema is given in empty stomach.
Anuvasana basti – fat enema is given soon after taking food, when the palms of the patient is still
wet due to hand wash, after food intake. (Ardra Pani Avastha)

कफ प ता नले व नं यूष ीररसैः       मात ्

Food should be given along with
Anna Yusha (Soup prepared with rice, grains) in case of Kapha disorder
Milk, in case of Pitta disorder and
Meat juice / Meat soup in case of Vata disorder. 55 ½


वात नौषध न      वाथ व ृतासै धवैयुतः
बि तरे को अ नले ि न धः      वा व लो णो रसाि वतः

In case of increased of Vata, one enema consisting of decoction of drugs which mitigate Vata,
Trivrt, Saindhava Mixed with fats, Liquids of sweet and sour taste, made warm and administered
will be ideal. 56

 य ोधा दगण वाथप का द सतायुतौ
प ते   वाद ु हमौ सा य ीरे ुरसमा       कौ

In case of increase of Pitta, one enema consisting of decoction of drugs of Nyagrodhadi gana and
Padmakadi gana made sweet and cold and mixed with ghee, milk , sugarcane juice and honey
will be ideal.

आर वधा द न      वाथव सका दयुता      यः
   ाः स ौ गोमू ा ती णो णकटुकाः कफे

In case of increase of Kapha, three enemas consisting of decoction of drugs of Argwadhadi
gana, and Vastakadi gana mixed with honey, cow urine, possessing penetrating, hot and pungent
properties is ideal. 58


 य ते सि नपाते अ प दोषान ् नि त यतः           मात ्

In case of increase of all the Doshas together, these three kinds of enema will bring down the
Doshas for which another enema need to be given with drugs of all the above mentioned
qualities. 60


         Page No. 245                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                        Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
         यः परं बि तमतोने छ य ये च क सकाः
न ह दोष चतथ
          ु अि त पन
                  ु द येत यं                 त

Other physicians do not desire any enema other than these three because there is no fourth dosha
for which another enema need to be given.

उ        लेशनं शु करं दोषाणां शमनं       मात ्
        धैव क पये बि त म य ये अ प        च ते

Yet others say that only three kinds of enema are to be prepared,

Utkleshana - that causing of the Doshas,
Shodhana - that causing purification, by expelling the Doshas and
Shamana – that causing mitigation subsiding them inside the body. 61

दोषौषधा दबलतः सवमेत          माणये त ्

All these are to be justified on the basis of strength of the Doshas, drugs etc.

स य ि न ढ ल गं त ु नासंभा य नवतये त ्

Administration of enemas should be continued till symptoms of proper enema are obtained.


Karma Basti – treatment with 30 enemas

    ा     नेह एकः प चा ते    वादशा थापना न च
सा वासना न कमवं ब तयि           ंशद रताः

A course of 30 enemas with one fat enema at the beginning and five at the end, with twelve
decoction enema and twelve fat enema alternately in the middle is called as Karma basti. 63
Here, each day, one enema is usually given. Some expert doctors may give two enemas per day.
But one enema per day is the common standard

F = Fat enema = Anuvasana = Snehabasti
D = Decoction enema = Niruha = Asthapana

1=F           2=F      3=D      4=F          5=D      6=F      7=D       8=F       9=D      10 = F
11 = D        12 = F   13 = D   14 = F       15 = D   16 = F   17 = D    18 = F    19 = D   20 = F
21= D         22 = F   23= D    24 = F       25 = D   26 = F   27 = F    28 = F    29 = F   30 = F


              Page No. 246                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Kala Basti – 15 enema regimen

कालः प चदशैको अ            ाक्   नेहो अ ते      य तथा
ष     प चब      य त रताः

A course of 15 enemas, with one fat enema at the beginning and three at the end, with six
decoction enemas and five fat enema alternately in the middle- is known as Kala Basti. 64

1=F          2=D       3=F         4=D         5=F      6=D   7=F       8=D       9=F    10 = D
11 = F       12 = D    13 = F      14 = F      15 = F


Yogabasti – 8 day enema regimen -

योगो अ टौ ब तयो अ           तु
    यो न हाः     ने हा च   ने हावा य तयो भौ

A course of eight enemas, with one fat enema both at the beginning and at the end, with three
decoction enema and three fat enema alternately in the middle is known as- yoga basti.

1=F             2=D         3=F             4=D         5=F    6=D              7=F     8=F


Sneha Basti - Niruha Basti

    नेहवि तं न हं वा नै कमेवा दशीतये त ् ६५
उ     लेशाि नवधौ      नेहाि न हा म तौ भयम ्
त माि न ढः        ने यः    याि न     य चानुवा सतः ६६
    नेहशोधनयु    यैवं बि तकम        दोषिजत ्

Either fat enema or decoction enema alone should not be administered.
More of fat enema may cause nausea and loss of digestion strength.
More of decoction enema may cause fear of increase of Vata.
Hence those who are given decoction enema should also be given fat enema and those who are
given fat enema should also be given decoction enema;
Enema therapy will balance the three Doshas only when it is both lubricatingand purifying. 65-
661/2


Matra Basti – Low dose fat enema –

     वया   ने हपान य मा या योिजतः समः ॥६७॥ मा ाबि तः           म ृतः    ने हः

Fat enema consisting of fat quantity equivalent to the minimum quantity of fat used for
Snehakarma is known as Matra Basti.
In practice, a very low dose of medicated oil or ghee – 50 – 75 ml is administered as Matra Basti.
            Page No. 247                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

शीलनीयः सदा च सा
बालव ृ ा वभार    ी यायामास त च तकैः
वातभ नाबला पाि ननप
                 ृ े वरसुखा म भः
दोष नो न पर हारो ब यः        ु टमलः सुखः

It should be used always for
Bala – children,
Vriddha – the aged,
Adhva, Bhara, Stri, Vyayama – who are habituated to long walking, carrying heavy weight,
sexual activity and exercise
Chinta – who think too much,
who are suffering from- diseases of vata, fractures, debility, poor who are digestive activity, for
kings, wealthy persons and persons who live happily.
It conquers the Doshas, does not need strict regimen, gives strength, eliminates the wastes-
faeces, urine etc. easily and is comfortable. 67-69


Uttarabasti- urethral and vaginal enema/ douche:-

ब तौ रोगेषु नार णां यो नगभाशयेषु च
  व ा थापनशु े यो वद या बि तमु तरम ्

In diseases of the urinary bladder and of vagina and uterus in women, uttarabasti should be
administered, to those who have purified by two or three decoction enemas, per rectum. 70


आतुरा गुलमानेन त ने ं      वादशा गुलम ्
व ृ त गोपु छव मल
               ू म ययोः कृतक णकम ्
स ाथक वेशा ं ल णं हे मा दस भवम ्
कु दा वमारसुमनः पु पव ृ तोपमं      ढम ्

The nozzle should be 12 Angula in length, in terms of patients own fingers, round- tubular
resembling a cow’s tail at its end should have an orifice of mustard size. It should be made of
gold, silver etc metals, it should be smooth, resembling the stalk of flowers such as Kunda,
Ashvamara and sumanas. It should be strong. 71-72

त य बि तमद
         ृ ुलघुमा ा शुि त वक प वा

The enema liquid should be mild in strength, light- easily acting, its quantityone Sukti- 24 g or
lesser.


          Page No. 248                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Uttarabasti Vidhi Procedure:-

अथ      नाता शत या य       नेहबि त वधानतः
ऋजोः सुखोप व ट य पीठे जानस
                         ु मे मद
                               ृ ौ
  टे मे े ि थते च ज शनैः        ोतो वशु ये
सू मां शलाकां    णये तया शु े अनस
                                ु ेव न
आमेहना तं ने ं च न क पं गुदव ततः
पी डते अ तगते      ने हे   नेहबि त मो हतः

Next the patient who has been given bath and food in accordance with the regimen prescribed for
fat enema, should one’s knees, this penis should be held straight- by the physician and a thin
probe should be slowly inserted the by the physician and a thin probe should be slowly inserted
into the urethra to clear the channel; after thus clearing the passage, the enema nozzle should be
inserted along the line of the Suture, to the entire length of the Urethal passage- till the cavity of
the urinary bladder is reached, without shaking and the enema bag pressed just as described for
rectal enema, pushing the fat-0 oil, ghee etc. into the urinary bladder; this is the ideal method- for
a urethral enema. 73-75 ½

बि तनमेन व धना द या ीं चतुरो अ प वा
अनुवासनव छे षं सवमेवा य च तयेत ्

In this manner three or four enemas should be given; all other procedures- after care, food etc. are
planned similar to that of fat enema therapy. 76-76 ½

  ीणामातवकाले तु यो नग ृ या यपाव ृतेः
वदधीत तदा त मादन ृताव प चा यये
यो न व ंशशूलेषु यो न यापचस ृ दरे

For women, Vaginal/ Uterine enema- douche should be administered during the Menstrual period
only for, it is only then that it- uterus is without its closure material; it can be given even apart
from the menstrual period, in emergency. In diseases such as prolapsed and pain of the uterus or
Vagina, in other diseases of uterus and vagina and in menorrhagia. 77-78

ने ं दशा गुलं मु ग वेशं चत ुर ग ुलम ्
अप यमाग यो यं        या     य गुलं मू व म न
मू कृ     वकारे षु, बालानां वे कम गुलम ्

The nozzle- for this enema should be ten Angulas in length, permitting the entry of a grain of
Mudga- green gram, it should inspected to a length of four Angula in case of vaginal passage and
to a length of two Angula in case of urethral passage in diseases like Dysuria etc. and in case of
children it shall be one Angulas. 79

 कु चो म यमा मा ा, बालानां शिु तरे वत॥
                                     ु ८०॥

          Page No. 249                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
The medium quantity of enema is one prakunca Pala=48 g and for children one Sukti- half
Pala=24 g only 80

उ तानायाः शयनायाः स यक् स को य सि थनी
उ वजा वाि        चतुरानहोरा ेण योजयेत ्
बि तंि     रा मेवं च    नेहमा ां वव यन ्
 यहमेव च व          य     णद या पुन    यहम ्

The women, who is lying on a cot with her face upwards, and legs folded at the knees and kept
erect, should be administered, the Vaginal/ Urethal enema, three or four times in a day and night;
it should be continued for three days only increasing the quantity of fat enema liquid daily;
After a gap three days it should be administered again for another three days. 81-82


Samanya Bastikala- periods of administration of enema generally :-

प ा वरे को व मते ततः प ात ् न हणम ् । स यो न ढ च आ वा यः स परा ात ् वरे चतः
॥८३॥

Purgation therapy should be resorted to after a fortnight after emesis therapy
and decoction enema after a fortnight after purgation therapy,
Fat enema- therapy should be administered immediately after decoction enema but after seven
days after purgation therapy. 83

यथा कुसु भा दयुता तोया ागं हरे पटः
तथा      वीकृता ेहा बि त नहरते मलान ् ८४

Just as the cloth adsorbs the color from the water,boiled with Kusumbha etc, colouring materials,
similarly, the enema, absorbs the Doshas from the moistened body. 84


Basti Chikitsa Sresthata- importance of enema therapy :-

शाखागताः को ठगता च रोगा ममा वसवावयवा गजा च
ये सि त तेषां न तु कि चद यो वायोः परं          ज म न हे तुरि त
व     ले म प ता दमलोचयानां व ेपसं हारकरः स य मात ्
त या त ंव ृ     य शमाय ना य व ते वना भेषजमि त कि चत ्
त माि च क सा         इत      द टः कृ   ना च क सा अ प च बि तरे कैः

For all the diseases which are localized in the Shakha (extremities), Koshta (alimentary tract),
Marma (vital organs), all the organs above the shoulders, there is no other cause, more important
than Vata.
Vata is the one responsible for transportation and destruction of the increased faeces, Kapha, Pitta
and other Malas – wastes;

              Page No. 250                                           Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
To balance the greatly increased Vata, there is no treatment more efficient other than enema
therapy.

Hence it is described as half of the treatment (Ardha Chikitsa) – of all diseases while some
others authorities say, that it is full treatment even.

तथा नजाग तु वकारका रर तौषध वेन शर यधो अ प

Similarly, Sira Vyadha – venesection treatment is considered to be effective in vitiated blood
conditions. 87
Siravyadha is the treatment either half or full for the vitiated / increased blood which is the cause
for internal and external diseases.


Thus ends the chapter Basti Vidhi- the 19th in Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita.


          Page No. 251                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan