Chapter 25 Yantra Vidhi य                               व ध Uses of Blunt
Instruments
Let us learn about different types of instruments that are used in Ayurveda. This is the
25th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi
Simhagupta. The chapter name Yantra Vidhi Adhyaya. Yantra means instrument.


Definition of Yantra – Yantra Nirvachana –

नाना वधानं श यानां नानादे श     बा धनाम ्
आहतुम युपायो य तत ् य       ं य च दशने १
अश भग दराद नां श          ाराि नयोजने
शेषा गप रर ायां तथा ब      या दकम ण- २
घ टकालाबुश ृ गं च जा बवौ टा दका न

Equipments which are useful to
extract the different types of foreign bodies causing pain in different parts of the body,
to look into hemorrhoids, rectal fistula etc.
to apply sharp instruments, Alkalies (Kshara) and fire (Agni Karma);
to protect the remaining parts other than the diseased in therapies like enema etc,
and the pot (Ghatika), ground horn (Alabu) of animal, Jambavaustha- cylindrical smooth stone
etc. are all known as yantra (medical instruments). 1-2 ½

अनेक पकाया ण य        ा ण व वधा यतः
वक    य क पये बु या

Yantras (instruments) are of many shapes, functions, types, hence they are to be fabricated and to
be prepared with intelligence. 3

यथा थूलं तु व यते
तु या न क क संह काका दम ग
                        ृ प        णाम ्
मुखैमुखा न य    ाणां कुयात ् त सं का न च

Yantras are described in brief, as follows;
Those which have their mouth resembling the mouth of
Kanka (heron), Simha (lion), Ruksha (bear), Kaka (crow) and other animals and birds should be
prepared under the respective names of animals and birds;


         Page No. 289                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
1, Swastika Yantra – Cruciform instruments –

अ टादशा गुलायामा यायसा न च भू रशः
मसरू ाकार-पय तैः क ठे ब ा न क लकेः
व या        वि तक या ण मूले अ कुशनता न च
तै ृढै रि थसंल श याहरण म यते

Swsatika Yantras should be generally 18 Angula- fingers breadth –in length,
They are made chiefly from iron;
They are shaped like a Masura dala (cotyledon of a lentil) at its edges, held by a rivet bolt at their
neck, slightly bent like an Ankusha (goad of the elephant) at its handle are known as Swastika
yantra- Cruci from instruments.
These are useful to pull out foreign bodies stuck hard in the bones. 4-6


2, Samdamsha yantra – forceps are of two types –

क लक        वमु ता ौ स दंषौ षोडश अ गुलौ
 वक् शरा नायु प शत ल न श यापकषणौ
षड गुलोअ यो हरणे सू मश योपप मणाम ्

one with a catch at its tip and the other without a catch.
The one with a catch is 16 Angula length, used for extracting foreign bodies stuck up in the skin,
veins, tendons and muscles.;
The one without a catch is 6 Angula in length and useful for extracting small foreign bodies and
eye lashes. 7-8


3, Muchundi Yantra – forceps with teeth

मुचु डी सू मद तजुमूले      चकभूषणा
ग भीर ण मांसानां अमणःशो षत य च

Muchundi Yantra – forceps with teeth has small teeth, straight, with tooth catch , hook at its
root; useful for pulling out the fleshy parts from deep wounds and remnants of flesh from the
Arma (pterygium), which has been cut. 9


4, Talayantra- instruments with flat arms

 वे दशा गुले म      यतालवत ् वयेकतालके
तालय    े    म ृते कणनाडीश यापहा रणी

Talayantra- instruments with flat arms are of two types- 12 Angula length, resembling the palate
(fin) of the fish in shape,

            Page No. 290                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
- with one flat disc at its mouth;
- with two flat disc;
Both are useful for removing foreign bodies from the orifice of the ear. 10


5, Nadiyantra - Tubular instruments (probe)

नाडीय    ा ण सु षरा ण एकाने कमुखा न च
    ोतोगतानां श यानां आमयानां च दशने
    याणां सुकर वाय कुयात ् आचूषणाय च
त      तार प रणाह दै य    ोतोनुरोधतः

Nadiyantra - Tubular instruments (probe) are hollow, with one or more opening, useful for
looking into body parts, recognizing foreign bodies and diseases localized in the channels of the
tissues, for facilitating treatments and for sucking out. Their width, perimeter vary as per size,
shape etc. of the channels. 11-12

दशा गुल ा अधनाहा अ तः क ठश यावलो कनीनाडी

Nadi Yantra for seeing inside throat shall be 10 Angula in length and ½ Angula in thickness
diameter.

प चमख
    ु ि छ ा चतु कण य स            हे
वार ग य,     वकण य        ि छ ा त      माणतः

Nadi Yantra comes with many openings (4 – 5) with different size, length, thickness etc.

वार गकणसं थानाना दै यानुरोधतः
ना दरे वं वधा चा या    टं श या न कारयेत ्

Many other tubular instruments may be prepared to observe the foreign bodies, depending on the
shape, thickness and length of the part to be observed.14


Padma Karnika

प क णकया मूि न स शी          वादशा गुला
चत ुथसु षरा नाडी श य नघा तनी मता

The tubular instrument having the shape of Padma Karnika – the round, flat central part of the
lotus studded with small holes- at its top, twelve Angula – finger breath in length , with a
hollow area of one fourth – it length is useful for catching and removing the foreign body.15


          Page No. 291                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                      Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
6, Arsho Yantra

अशसां गो तनाकारं य         कं चतुर ग ुलम ्
नाहे प चा गल
           ु ं पंस
                 ु ां     मदानां षड गल
                                     ु म्
  वि छ ं दशने याधेरेकि छ ं तु कम ण
म येअ य      य गल
                ु ं छ म गु टोदर व तत
                                   ृ म्
अधा गुलो ि      तो      तक णकं च तद ू वतः

The Arsho Yantra- the instrument to view the hemorrhoid inside the rectum. It has cylindrical
shape.
Its circumference is 5 Angula in men and 6 Angula for women;
with two orifices- one at each end, useful for seeing the pile masses and
with one slit shall be at its centre three Angula in length and of the size of the middle portion of
the thumb in widths, about half Angula above the slit three shall be a karnuka – edge, (rim) 16-18


7, Samiyantra

श या यं ता ुगि छ ं य         मशः     पीडनम ्

The instrument known as Samiyantra is similar- to the above but without the offices and useful
for squeezing the pile masses. 19
The Nadiyantra to see the malignant tumor and piles, polyp of the nose shall be with one orifice,
two Angula in length,

सवथा अपनयेदो ठं छ ाद ू व भग दरे

of the size of the index finger in thickness and resembling the instrument meant for rectal fistula.
20


Nadi Yantra to See Nasal Polyps, Piles etc

 ाणाबुदाशसामेकि छ ा        ना   य गुल वया
 दे शनीपर णाहा       या ग दरय      वत ्

shall be with one orifice, two angula in length, of the size of the index finger in thickness, and
resembling the instrument meant for rectal fistula.


8, Anguli Tranaka- finger protector

अ गु ल ाणकं दा तं वा         वा चतुर ग ुलम ्
  वि छ ं गो तनाकारं त व            ववत
                                     ृ ौ सख
                                          ु म्


          Page No. 292                                                Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Anguli Tranaka- finger protector – is made from ivory / wood, 4 Angula in length, with 2
orifices- one at each end; shaped like the nipple of the cow and suitable to extend the finger
(when in use). 21


9, Instrument to look into Vagina and Wounds

यो न णे णं म ये सु षरं षोडशा गुलम ्
मु ाभ ं चत ु भ तम भोजमुकुलाननम ्
चत ुः शलाकामा ा तं मूले त वकसे मुखे

The instrument to look into the vagina and wounds shall be hollow in the middle, 16 Angula in
length, with four flaps held tight by a ring, resembling the bud of a lotus in shape, fixed with four
rods at its root – handling place and its mouth- opening like of the bud,. 22


Instruments to (10) oil sinus and (11) to wash it

य    े नाडी णा य ग ालनाय षड गुले
बि तय     ाकृती मूले मुखे अ गु ठकलायखे
अ तो अक णके मल
             ू े नब मद
                     ृ च
                       ु मणी

Two instrument- one for oiling the sinus ulcer and the other for washing it shall be 6 Angula in
length, having the shape of a Bastiyantra (enema nozzle) with an orifice at its root allowing the
entry of the thumb and the orifice at its tip allowing round pea; without any edge, Rim at its tip
and fixed with soft leather bag at its root. 23-24 ½


12, Nadi Yantra for Udakodar/Ascies

    वदवारा न लका प छन लका वोदकोदरे
धूमब    या दय    ा ण न द टा न यथायथम ्

Nadiyantra for use in Udakodara- ascites shall have two orifices- one at each end or it can be
even the tube of a peacocks feather. 25


13, Shringa Yantra – Animal Horn

 य गुला यं भवे       गं चूषणे अ टादशा गुलम ्
अ ं स ाथकि छ ं सुन         ं चुचुकाकृ त

The Shringa- animal horn useful to suck shall have the orifice of three Angula at its root and that
of mustard seed at the tip, eighteen Angula in length. The tip resembles the shape of nipple. 26


          Page No. 293                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
14, Alabu- the hollowed gourd

 य गुला यं भवे               गं चूषणे अ टादशा गुलम ्
अ ं स ाथकि छ ं सन
                ु                 ं चच
                                     ु ुकाकृ त

Alabu- the hollowed gourd will be twelve Angula in length and eighteen Angula in diameter
with a round orifice of four Angula – in which, with a burning wick placed in its interior, useful
for extracting Kapha and Raktha- blood. 27

Note – The procedure explained in Alabu yantra is called as cupping. Whenever vitiated blood or
pus is to be extracted from a wound / ulcer, Alabu yantra is placed over the affected area and
heated from outside. It expands, causing vacuum inside. This causes sucking action and the pus /
vitiated blood gets sucked out.


15, Ghati – pot

त व घट      हता गु म वलयो नमने च सा

Ghati- pot is similar and useful for making the tumors of the abdomen soft and raise it above
from its low level. 27 ½


16, Shalaka Yantra - set of instruments with rod like shape

शलाका या न य            ा ण नानाकमाकृती न च
यथायोग माणा न तेषामेषणकम ण

Shalaka yantra – set of instruments with rod like shape
Rod like instruments are of many functions and shapes and size suitable to be purpose for which
they are used. 28

उभे ग डूपदमुखे          ोतो यः श यहा रणी
मसरू दलव     े     वे   या ताम टनवा गल
                                     ु े

Of them, two are for probing, both having their mouth resembling that of an earth worm;
two for removing foreign bodies from the channels having their mouths resembling a lentil, one
of eight and the other of nine Angula in length. 29


17, Shanku Yantra – Hooks

श कवः ष          उभौ तेषां षोडश वादशा गुलौ
 यूहने अ हफणाव           ौ     वौ दश वादशा गुलौ
चालने शरपु खा यौ आहाय ब डशाकृती


           Page No. 294                                              Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shanku Yantra – hooks are six, among them two, (16 and 12 Angula in length), their mouth
shaped like the hood of a serpent, are meant for joining (the edges of wounds etc);
Two more- one of twelve and the other of ten Angula in length, having the mouth resembling a
Sharapunkha (bottom of arrow) meant for loosening the hard objects that are to be extracted. The
size resembles a fish hook. 30-31

नतो अ े श कुना त ु यो गभश कुर त           म ृतः
अ टा गुलायत तेन मूढगभ हरे ि         याः

The hook known as Garbhashanku, is bent in its tip resembling a conch, 18 Angula in length
and meant for pulling the impacted foetus in women. 32


18, Instrument for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder

अ मयहरणं सपफणाब कम तः

Instrument for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder, shall be shaped like the hood of a
snake and bent inwards at its tip.


19, Instrument for extracting the tooth

शरपु खमुखं    द तपातनं चतुर गुलम ्

Instrument for extracting the tooth should have the shape of Sharapunkha (base of arrow) and is
of four Angula – in length. 33


20, The rod- like instruments meant for clearing sinuses etc

कापास व हतो णीषाः शालाकाः ष          माजने

The rod- like instruments meant for clearing sinuses etc. shall have their tip covered with a cap of
cotton wool.


21,

पायावास नद ुराथ    वे दशा वादशा गुले

Two others Nadi yantra (rod like instruments)- one of 10 and other of12 Angula- in length
meant for drawing the rectum near – by closing the things and extending it farther. 34

 वे ष स ता गुले     ाणे , वे कण अ टनवा गुले


          Page No. 295                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                     Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Two other instruments, of six and seven Angula respectively for use in the nose; two of eight
and nine Angula for use in the ears.


22, That meant for clearing the ear

कणशोधनम व थप          ा तं   ुवाननम ्

That meant for clearing the ear, with its edge like the leaf of the Ashwattha tree and face
resembling a ladle. 35


23, Jambauvoshta- Cylindrical smooth stones

शलाकाजा बवौ ठानां       ारे अ नौ च      थक्   यम ्
यु   यात ् थूलाणुद घाणां

Jambauvoshta- Cylindrical smooth stones- each three in number, thick, thin and long in shape be
used for the application of caustic Alkalies and branding by fire – therapies.


24, That meant for use in international Hernia- in the scrotum

शलाकाम     व मन
म यो वव ृ तद डां च मूले चाध द ुसि नभाम ्

That meant for use in international Hernia- in the scrotum shall have a round rod, bigger at its
middle and upper portion and its root shaped like the half moon- 36.


25, Instrument meant for cauterizing the polyp

कोलाि थदलत ु या या नासाशबुददाहकृत ्

Instrument meant for cauterizing the polyp and tumors of the nose shall have its mouth similar to
the cotyledon of the stone of Kola- Jujube fruit. 36

अ टा गुला न नमुभाि त ः           ारौषध मे
कनीनीम यमानामीनखमानसमैमुखैः

The tree for applying caustic Alkali therapy shall be eight Angula- in length, their mouths –tips
resembling the nails of the index, middle and ring finger- in size respectively. 38

 वं वमु ता न य      ा ण मे शु    य जना दषु


          Page No. 296                                               Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                       Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
those meant for clearing the penis / urethra and applying eye salve has been described at relevant
places to be continued


26, Anu yantra- Accessory instruments:-

अनुय     ा यय का तर जुव        ा ममु गराः
व ना विज वाबाला च शाखानखमुख वजाः
कालः पाकः करः पदो भयं हष च, ति            याः
उपाय व     वभजेदालो य नपुणं धया

Accessory instruments are – the magnet, rope/ thread , cloth, stone, hammer, leather strap,
intensive- of animals, tongue, hair, branches of trees, nails mouth, teeth, time, digestion hands,
feet, fear and pleasure.

They are used judiciously based on the assessment of disease and the patient. 39-40


Different functions of Yantra –

नघातनो मथनपूरणमागशु सं यू नाहरणब धनपीडना न
आचूषणो नमननाममचालम ग यावतनजुकरणा न च य                      कम

Nirghatana- pulling out after crushing,
unmathana- pulling out after twisting,
Poorana- filling,
Marga shuddhi- clearing the passage,
Vyuhana- bringing together,
Aharana – extracting,
Bandhana- binding,
Peedana- Rubbing,
Achushana – sucking,
Unnamana- lifting up,
Namana- pushing down, bending down
Chalana- shaking,
Bhanga- breaking,
Vyavartana- overturning,
Rujukarana- straightening etc. are the functions of the Yantras- blunt instruments. 41

ववतते सा ववगाहते च         ा यं ग ृह वो रते च य मात ् ।
य   े वतः क कमुखं      धानं   थानेषु सव व धका र य च ॥४२ १/२॥

Among the blunt instruments Kankamukha Yantra, is the best as it can be twisted easily,
dipped deep, can be held firmly, catches the objects firmly and is the authority in all places. It is
indispensable. 42

Thus ends the chapter Yantravidhi- the 25th in Sutrasthana of Asthangahrdaya Samhita.
          Page No. 297                                                 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan

                                                                   Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan