# Study

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.3]]
Section 2: Study Qualities of a good text p.102 Sections of the Charaka Samhita p.103 Mythical Origin of the Charaka p.106 The 36 devices of a treatise p.108 The teacher p.110 Method of study p.111 The worthy disciple p.111 Ritual of initiation p.112 Physician’s code of honor p.112 A list of required knowledge p.114 The 8 topics for debate p.116 Debate p.116 Methods of debate p.117 The Treatise: Qualities of the Treatise: Various treaties in medicine are found in society. From amongst them, one should select that which is great, used by eminent and wise men, full of ideas, respected by authorities, intelligible and beneficial to all the 3 types of disciples (dull, mediocre and intelligent), free from the defect of repetition, coming down from the sages, with well-composed introduction, discussion and conclusion, having firm base, free from week and difficult words, having abundant expressions, with traditional ideas, devoted mainly to arriving at the essence of ideas, having consistent ideas, with demarcated topics, easily comprehensible, and having definitions illustrated with examples. Such a treatise, like the clear sun, enlightens the entire subject, while warding off the darkness of ignorance.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.155]]
The Charaka (and any good text)contains various ideas, variegated with various sentences pleasing with meanings, possessed with various auspicious words and their unions and capable of defeating opponents in various debates.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.32-40]]
Origin of the Charaka Samhita and It’s Sister Texts: It was only the extraordinary merit and not the different instruction of the sage that made Agnivesha the author of the compendium [the Charaka Samhita] first. Afterwards, Bhela etc. also authored their own compendiums and all of them, intelligent ones, presented their works before Atreya along with the group of sages. The sages, on hearing the composition of benevolent topics were extremely pleased and approved it with the remark that they were properly composed. All praised them, the benefactors of all creatures, along with the loud applause for the compassion on creatures. These (loud) virtuous words of the great sages were heard by the godly sages and gods living in heaven and they were extremely delighted. The deep and affectionate sound of “well done” expressed by the creatures with happiness in the sky resounded the 3 worlds. The pleasant wind began to blow, all corners blossomed with lustre and there were divine showers of flowers and water. Then the goddesses of Buddhi (intelligence), Siddhi (success), Smrti (memory), Medha (intellect)j, Dhrti (restraint), Kirti (fame), Ksama (forbearance) and Daya (kindness) entered into Agnivesha etc. Thus their compendiums approved by the great sages were established on strong footing for the welfare of the creatures.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.27]]
10 Aspects which are covered by any good Ayurvedic text: body (anatomy) It’s functions (physiology) Causes (etiology) Disease (pathology) Operations (therapeutics) Objective to be achieved (health) Time (environments and stages of disease) Doer (physician) Instrument (therapeutic measures) Method (procedure of treatment including preparations) Definition of Authoritative scriptures: is the Veda, or any other source of learning which does not disagree with the Veda. Also: is composed by critical scholars is approved by noble persons is implemented for well-being of the people tells that: charity, penance, religious sacrifice, truthfulness, non-violence and celibacy lead perfect to well-being

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.157]]
The 8 Sthanas (sections), in order, of the Charaka Samhita, and their number of chapters: 1)Sloka (also called Sutra) -30 chapters 2)Nidana -8 3)Vimana -8 -“Vimana” is termed because of providing properly the correct knowledge of the specific features of the entities like doshas etc. with reasoning and classification.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.33]]
4)Sarira -8 5)Indriya -12 6)Cikitsita - 30 7)Kalpa -12 8)Siddhi -12 This chart:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.35]]
[ The following is/ will be in effect a Table of Contents for the original Charaka- just without any page numbers. It is a few pages long here, and was taken from

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.35]]
68.]: Index [Table of Contents/ List] of all chapters of the Charaka Samhita: located in Sutrasthana, chapter 30, sutras 34 through 68 (p.243-246) [Write this out into a chart.] The scope of the sections will be said in the respective sections. Now hear the 120 chapters with their titles and order:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.36-43]]
The quadruplet on drugs consists of the chapter on longevity, apamarga seeds, aragvadha and 6 locations of evacuation That on the healthy consists of quantity of diet, his diet, non-suppression of urges and introductory descriptions of sense organs. That on precepts consists of lesser quadruped, greater quadruped, 3 desires and merits and demerits of V. In the quadruplet on preparation, there are chapters on unction, fomentation, arrangement of the equipments and well-equipped physician. In the quadruplet on diseases, there are chapters on the number of cranial diseases, 3 swellings, 8 abdominal diseases and major disorders. The quadruplet on planning consists of the chapters on 8 despicables, reducing and saturating therapies and properly formed blood. The quadruplet on drugs consists of the chapters on the origin of person, Atreya- Bhadrkapya (discussion among sages), food and drinks and various types of food and drinks. The 2 last chapters- one on 10 vital organs and the other on 10 heart-rooted vessels- are devoted to vital force and body and also qualities of a physician.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.44-46]]
6 quadruplets on drugs, the healthy, precepts, preparations, diseases and planning, the 7th one concerning food and drinks along with 2 concluding chapters in the end constitute the 30-chaptered, meaningful Slokasthana which is regarded as the auspicious head of the treatise. In this section, the quadruplets having deep significance have been compiled together. This section is called as Slokasthana because of it’s praise-worthy position and compilatory character.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.47]]
In Nidanasthana (section on pathology and diagnosis) there are 8 chapters; 1 each on fever, internal hemorrhage, gulma, prameha, leprosy, phthisis, insanity and epilipsy.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.48-49]]
In Vimanasthana (section on specific measures) 8 chapters one each on rasa, the 3 portions of the belly, epidemics, the 3 means of diagnosis of diseases, srotas (channels), classification of diseases, types of patients and treatment of diseases have been dealt with by the sage for the purpose of determining measures.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.50-52]]
Types of person, dissimilar clan, appearance of fetus (lesser and greater chapters), analysis of person, analysis of body, enumeration of body parts, delivery and management of child– these 8 chapters have been dealt with by the sage, the son of Atri, in the Sarirasthana (section on anatomy).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.53-55]]
‘Indriyasthana’ (section on fatal signs and symptoms) contains 12 chapters , such as, relating to complexion and voice, flowering, palpatory, sense organs, prodroma, characters of diseases, distorted images, inverted images, discoloration, imminent death, minute spot and cow-dung-powder.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.56-60]]
In Cikitsisthana (section on therapeutics), there are 30 chapters. Out of these first 2 chapters relate to rasayana (promotive measures) and vajikarana (aphrodisiacs) respectively and have 4 quarters each. The chapter on Rasayana consists of a quadruplet of haritaki-amalaki, desire for vital breath, amalaki plucked with hand and traditional importance of rasayan. The chapter on vajikarana consists of the following quadruplets– root of sara, (rice) soaked in milk, (cow) fed on leaves of black gram and the person having gained strength. The other 28 chapters relate to fever, internal hemorrhage, gulma, prameha, kustha, phthisis, insanity, epilepsy, (chest) wound, swelling, abdominal diseases, piles, grahani roga, anemia, dyspnea, cough, diarrhea, vomiting, erysipelas, thirst, poison, alcoholism, wounds, diseases of the 3 vital organs, urustambha (stiffness of thighs), vatavyadhi, vatarakta, yonivyapat (disorders of female genital organs).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.61-64]]
Now I shall tell about the pharmaceuticals which are described under Kalpasthana (section on pharmaceuticals) in 12 chapters such as– (madana) phala, jimuta, iksvaku, dhamargava, vatsaka, krtavedhana, syama-trivrt, aragvadha, tilvaka, snuhi, saptala- samkhini and danti-dravanti.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.65-67]]
In Siddhisthana (section on successful management) there are 12 chapters such as– management of evacuative measures, persons suitable and unsuitable for unctuous enema, management of the complications arisen due to improper application of enema, management of the complications of emesis and purgation, management of the complications of enema, various types of enematic formulations, management of the diseases of the 3 vital organs, application of enema, enema prepared with madanaphala, urethral and vaginal douches. “Thus the treatise is completed.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.68]]
The scope [contents] of the [each] chapter will be said in the respective chapters under different sections. “Thus one should be able to tell about the scope [contents] of the respective subjects from the entire treatise”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.35-68]]
[ The above is a few pages long here, and was taken from .]:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.4]]
Number of Chapters in each Section of the Charaka: Sthanas (Sections) Number of Chapters in Each: Sloka/ Sutra, Cikitsa 30 Indriya, Kalpa, Siddhi 12 Nidana, Vimana, Sarira 8 This chart:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.37]]
When studying a text, one should decide the exact meaning after knowing the context, the factors like place and time, the author’s intentions and scriptural methods.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.84]]
[For example, in one chapter day-sleep is listed as cause of disease, while in another...] “Entire misery of mind and body depends on ignorance, while entire happiness resides in pure knowledge.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.85]]
Opening statement of the Charaka: This treatise with wide scope is not illuminating to the ignorant people as the sun does not light the path for the blind.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.67]]
Purpose of the Charaka: to counter the diseases which have cropped up creating impediments in penance, abstinence, study, celibacy, religious observances and life-span.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.3]]
Mythical Origin of the Charaka Samhita: Bhardwaja, a great ascetic, went to Indra, the god of gods and the savior in quest of longevity.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.4-5]]
At first, Prajapati received Ayureda in it’s entirety as propounded by Brahma, therefrom Aswins (received), from Aswins lord Indra received it fully, that is why Bharadwaja, as requested by the sages, came to Indra.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.6-7]]
When diseases cropped up creating impediments in penance, abstinence, study, celibacy, religious observances and life-span of living beings, the holy great sages, out of sympathy on creatures, assembled on one of the auspicious sides of the Himalayas.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.8-14]]
Among them were Angira, Jamadagni, Vasistha, Kasyapa, Bhrgu, Atreya, Gautama, Sankhya, Pulastya, Narada, Asita, Agastya, Vamadea, Markandeya, Asvalayana, Pariksi, Bhiksu Atreya, Bharadwaja, Kapinjala, Viswamitra, Asmarathya, Bhargava, Cyavana, Abhijit, Gargya, Sandilya, Kaundinya(lya), Varksi, Devala, Galava, Sankrtya, Baijavapi, Kusika, Badarayana, Badisa, Saraloma, Kapya, Katyayana, Kankayana, Kaikaseya, Dhaumya, Marica, Kasyapa, Sarkaraksa, Hiranyaksa, Lokaksa, Paingi, Saunaka, Sakuneya, Maitreya, Maimatayani along with the sages of the Vaikhanasa and Valakhilya orders and other great sages. They all, sources of spiritual knowledge, self control and restraint of mind, illumined with brilliance of penance like fire having done oblations, took their seats comfortably and held auspicious deliberations.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.15-17]]
Disease-free condition is the best source of virtue, wealth, gratification and emancipation while the diseases are destroyers of these same, as well as of welfare and life itself. Now it was apparent that this was a great obstacle for human beings. What could be done? The Sages concentrated on this problem, and with their concentrated vision, they saw Indra as savior. That god of gods is only able to tell the correct means of amelioration.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.18-23]]
The sages asked, who should go to the abode of Indra to inquire about this? First spoke Bharadwaja, “I may will go for this mission” and so he was sent to Indra’s abode, where he saw the killer of Bala sitting in the midst of the group s of godly sages and glittering like fire. He approached him with felicitating words of praises and blessings and submitted the message of the sages humbly and in the best possible way- “Diseases causing fear in all living beings have appeared, so O Lord of gods, tell me the proper measures for their treatment”. Then Lord Indra, having observed the wide intelligence of the great sage, delivered to him Ayurveda in a few words.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.24]]
He Said: “Ayurveda continuing from time immemorial and virtuous was known by Brahma (the creator) first.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.25-26]]
Bharadwaja, the intelligent and concentrated sage, acquired the endless and 3- pronged Ayurveda properly and entirely in a short time. By this Bharadwaja attained immeasurable happy life-span and he transmitted that knowledge, as it is- neither more nor less- to the sages.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.27-29]]
The sages, desirous of long life, too received that benevolent Veda (compendium of knowledge) of promoting life-span from Bharadwaja. The great sages further grasped properly the knowledge of samanya (similarity), visesa (dissimilarity), guna (properties), dravya (substance), karma (action) and samavaya (inherence) by which they followed firmly the tenets of the compendium and attained the highest well-being and non- perishable life-span.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.30-31]]
Now Punarvasu, out of friendliness, and prompted with compassion for all creatures, bestowed the virtuous Ayurveda upon his six disciples- Agnivesa, Bhela, Jatukarna, Parasara, harita and Ksarapani.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 1.32-40]]
It was only the extraordinary merit -and not different instruction- that made Agnivesha the author of the first compendium of Atreya’s teaching. Afterwards, Bhela and the others also wrote their own texts and all of them, intelligent ones, presented their works before Atreya in the presence of a group of sages. The sages, on hearing the composition of benevolent topics were extremely pleased and approved it with the remark that they were properly composed. All praised them, the benefactors of all creatures, along with the loud applause for the compassion on all creatures. The loud virtuous words of the great sages were heard by the godly sages and gods living in heaven and they were extremely delighted. The deep and affectionate sound of “well done!” expressed by the creatures with happiness in the sky resounded the three worlds. The pleasant wind began to blow, all corners blossomed with lustre and there were divine showers of flowers and water. Then the goddesses of knowledge Buddhi (intelligence), Siddhi (success), Smrti (memory), Medha (intellect), Dhrti (restraint), Kirti (fame), Ksama (forbearance) and Daya (kindness) entered into Agnivesa and the other sages/ disciples. Thus their compendiums approved by the great sages were established on a strong footing for the welfare of all creatures.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.89]]
Quote about the Sutrasthana: “As the thread holds together the flowers in a necklace, this sutrasthana has been composed by the sage for the collection of various topics.”

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.34-54]]
[Sutra means ‘thread’.] [The following couple pages is information...] About the Charaka Samhita: (from )

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.34]]
Thus the discourse of sage Atreya contained in 120 chapters has been delivered by wise Agnivesa for the well-being of people.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.35]]
One, by studying it methodically, acquires longevity, fame, health, the three objects (virtue, wealth and enjoyment) in abundance and unique worldly success.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.36-40]]
The redactor [Charaka]] dilates the topics said in brief and abridges the over- detailed ones and thus makes the old treatise a new one. In this way, this superb treatise was redacted by Caraka, the great scholar but the same is observed as incomplete by it’s 1/3 portion. That was finished by Drdhabala, born in Pancanada pura, in order to complete it after worshiping Siva, the Lord of creatures. He filled up the gap with 17 chapters of Cikitsasthana, Siddhisthana and Kalpasthana on collecting the relevant material from various treatises. This treatise is full of words and ideas, free from textual defects and adored [adorned] with 36 particular “Tantrayuktis” (devises of treatise).

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.41-44]]
The devise of treatise are as follows: 1) scope 2) rational linking 3) extension of argument 4) import of words 5) partial statement 6) concise statement 7) detailed statement 8) filling of ellipsis 9) purpose 10) authoritative instruction 11) “adducement of reason” 12) extension of instruction 13) implication 14) conclusive statement 15) contextual restatement 16) categorical statement 17) non-categorical statement 18) exceptional statement 19) statement of contrariety 20) statement of objection 21) systematic interpretation 22) concession 23) explanation 24) doubt 25) retrospective reference 26) prospective reference 27) technical terms 28) deduction 29) collection 30) illustration 31) derivative definition 32) injunction 33) alternative statement 34) rational refutation 35) reaffirmation 36) source of origin

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.45]]
These exist wholly in the treatise delivered briefly or in details. Nevertheless they are seen partially in the former.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.46]]
As sun is for the lotus and lamp for the house so are the devices of the treatise serving the purpose of amplification and enlightening.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.47-48]]
“One whose mind is positioned even only in this treatise, acquires the other treatises as well quickly due to being conversant with reasoning.” Even studying various treatises a physician does not grasp their ideas without devices of treatise as one does not acquire wealth on loss of fortune.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.49-50]]
*“Treatise received badly harms the person as weapon does an ignorant one while the treatise and the weapon held up well protects the learned one.” (Hence these will be described again in details in the post-treatise section with (exposition of) merits and demerits of a treatise in order to provide right knowledge.) [[this is referring to Vols. 3 and 4 in P.V. Sharma’s edition.]]

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.51]]
One who after studying the entire text well thinks over the ideas and without hesitation applies them regularly in practice becomes bestower of happiness and life to men and advances in restraint, memory, knowledge and virtue.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.52-54]]
One in whose heart this compendium containing 12,000 stanzas stays is knower of ideas, thinker and expert in therapeutics. How can he not understand the diseases and their treatment? This text on therapeutics by Agnivesa is for the healthy as well as the diseased. Whatever is here in the treatise composed by Agnivesa and redacted by Caraka is also elsewhere and what is not here is not found anywhere else.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.54]]
Thus ends ...the treatise composed by Agnivesa, redacted by Caraka and re- constructed by Drdhabala as it was not available.

[[cite: Siddhisthana 12.34]]
[The above couple pages is information... About the Charaka Samhita: (from

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.4]]
54)] The end of the book (I/II): Thus the discourse of sage Atreya contained in 120 chapters has been delivered by wise Agnivesa for the well-being of all the people. One, by studying it methodically, acquires longevity, fame, health, 3 objects (virtue, wealth and enjoyment) in abundance and unique worldly success. The redactor dilates the topics said in brief and abridges the over-detailed ones and thus makes the old treatise a new one. In this way, this superb treatise was redacted by Caraka, the great scholar but the same is observed as incomplete by it’s 1/3 portion. That was finished by Drdhabala, born in Pancanada pura, in order to complete it after worshiping Siva, the Lord of creatures. He filled up the gap with 17 chapters of Cikitsasthana, Siddhisthana and Kalpasthana on collecting the relevant material from various treatises. This treatise is full of words and ideas, free from textual defects and adored with 36 particular “Tantrayuktis” (devices of treatise). (( all the above came from Siddhisthanam, chptr. XII, ending on pg. 681)) The Teacher: Qualities of the Teacher: One should examine the teacher. He should have clear idea of the subject, should have seen the practical applications, be skilful, amicable, pure, having practical experience, well-equipped, possessing all the senses in normal condition, acquainted with human constitutions, well- versed in courses of actions, having his knowledge uncensored, free from conceit, envy, anger, forbearing, fatherly to disciples, having qualities of a good teacher and capable of infusing understanding. The teacher possessing such qualities inculcates physician’s qualities in his disciple in a short time like the seasonal cloud providing good crop in a suitable land.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.18-19]]
Qualities of the great sages: sources of spiritual knowledge, (self control) and restraint of mind, illumined with brilliance of penance like fire. Definition of authority: -those who are free from rajas and tamas, endowed with strength of penance and knowledge, and whose knowledge is defectless, -those who are always un-contradicted and true universally in past, present and future, -those who’s words are free from doubt and are true because, being devoid of Rajas and Tamas, they can not speak a lie. Such people are known as apta (who have acquired all the knowledge), sista (expert in the discipline) and vibuddha (enlightened).

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.5]]
The Method of Study/Behavior: Having approached him one should, with a view to pleasing, treat him cautiously like fire, god, king, father and mother. Thus through his pleasure having obtained the knowledge of the entire treatise one should constantly make good efforts for firmness of knowledge, excellence of expression, understanding of ideas and power of speaking.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.6]]
The means for these are: Study, Teaching, and Discussion with Specialists.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.7]]
The Method of Study: One having sound health and waiting for the exact moment should get up in the morning or a little earlier and after finishing the essential routines and ablution should bow down to the gods, sages, cow, brahmana, preceptors, elders, accomplished persons and the teacher. Then sitting comfortably on even and clean ground should recited the aphorisms in order with clear voice attentively repeating it again and again. At the same time, entering deeply into the ideas he should under-stand them well in order to get rid of his own defects and to know other’s defects. In this way he should continue his study without wasting time in morning, mid-day, afternoon and night. This is the method of study.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.8]]
The Method of Teaching: The teacher, having decided to teach, should first of all examine the student.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.8]]
Qualities of the Worthy Disciple: Calm, of noble nature, not indulged in mean acts, with good-looking eyes, mouth and nasal ridge; having thin, red and clear tongue; with no abnormality in teeth and lips, not speaking with nasal utterance, having restraint, without vanity, intelligent, endowed with reasoning and memory, with broad mind, born in a family of physicians of having conduct like that, having insistence for the truth, without any deformity or impairment of senses, humble, un-haughty, having ability to understand essence of the ideas, without anger and addictions, endowed with modesty, purity, good conduct, affection, dexterity and sincerity, interested in study, devoted to understanding of ideas and practical knowledge without any distraction, having non greed or idleness, compassionate to all creatures, following all the instructions of the teacher and being attached to him.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.29]]
Which Classes [Casts] of Society Should Study Ayurveda: Ayurveda should be studied by the Brahmansa [priest class], Ksatriyas [Busness/ ruling class? Warrior class?] and Vaisyas [merchant/ shopkeeper class]. Brahmanas should study it for the welfare of living beings, Ksaatriyas for their protection and Vaisyas as profession or generally by all for the achievement of virtue, wealth and enjoyment.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.10]]
Ritual of Initiation: The teacher should tell him: the sun having northerly course, in bright fortnight, on auspicious day the benevolent lord moon having conjunction with one of the tisya, hasta, sravana and aswayuja constellations, in Kalyana karana and maitra muhurta you come here having shaved your head, observed fasting, taken bath, put o ochere-coloured cloth and sacred thread and with fragrant substances in your hand. You should also bring with you fire-wood, fire, ghee, pasting substance, water jars, garland, rope, lamp, vessel of gold, gold, silver, jewels, pearls, corals, silken cloth and sticks for outskirts of the sacrificial ground, sacred grass, fired paddy, mustard seeds, barley grains, white flowers strung together or not, pure (intellect-promoting) eatables and paste of fragrant woods. -Vi#8-9 He should do accordingly.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.11]]
Knowing that the disciple has come, the physician should make rectangular platform measuring four cubits an sloping eastward or northward, in an even and pure place. This should be smeared with cow-dung, covered with sacred grass and bound on borders with paridhi (particular sticks for this purpose). Further it should be equipped with the said articles such as sandal, water jar, silken garment, gold, etc. (listed in previous paragraph). Then attending to the fire with the fuel sticks made of palasa, ingudi, udumbara and madhuka while in pure condition and facing eastwards, as prescribed under the method of study, ho should offer oblations of honey and ghee to the fire reciting benedictory mantas first invoking Brahma, Agni, Dhanwantari, Prajapati, Aswins, Indra and sages, the authors of the aphorisms and ending with “swaha” three times each.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.12]]
The disciple should follow him. After offering oblations he should go round the fire keeping it to the right side. Then brahmanas should recite “swasti” (mantras promoting well-being). At the end, he should pay respects to the physicians present in the ceremony. Then at this ceremony the physician should instruct the initiate of the code of honor.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.13]]
The Physician’s / Student’s Code of Honor: Now the teacher should instruct him in the presence of fire, brahmanas and physicians:”

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.13]]
you should live with celibacy, keeping beard and mustaches, speaking truth, not eating meat, using pure and intellect-promoting things without envy and possessing no weapons. You should never disobey my words except in case they lead to king’s wrath, loss of life, great unrighteousness and other such calamity. You should always surrender to me, regard me as head, be submissive to me and follow the course which is liked by and useful to me. YOU should live with me behaving as son, servant ad suppliant. YOU should move without haughtiness, carefully, with mind concentrated, humbleness and constant vigilance, without jealousy and with my permission. Whether permitted or not tho move out, you should first make effort, as far as possible, to collect things for the teacher. Then you join the medical profession and wish success in work, earnings of wealth, fame and heaven after death, you should always think of the welfare of all the living beings keeping cow and brahmana before. YOU should make effort to provide health to the patients by all means. You should not think ill of the patients even at the cost of your life. You should not approach the others woman and any other’s property even in imagination. Your dress and accessories should be modest. YOU should not be addicted to drinking, indulged in sins, and associated with sinners, you should speak smooth, pure, righteous, blissful, thankful, truthful, useful and measured words. YOU should always keep place and time in mind, with good remembrance, striving constantly for knowledge, progress and excellence of equipements, you should never prescribe medicines for those disliked by the king, disliked by wealthy magnets or disliking them and for all those who are excessively diseased, wicked; having troublesome conduct, behavior and management, have not counteracted their censures and one nearing death; and also for the ladies in absence of their husbands or guardians, you should never accept meat offered by the ladies without permission of their husbands or guardian. While entering into the patient’s house you should take along a known person whose entry is permitted; you should be well-dressed, with head lowered, having good memory, with stillness, thinking carefully and moving accordingly; having entered there, you should not engage your speech, mind and sense organs anywhere except the patient, his well-being and other entities of the patient’s body respectively. The matters of the patient’s house should not be disclosed outside, even though you know the diminution in life-span of the patient you should not mention it where it is liable to cause harm to the patient or others. Even though you are learned enough, you should not boast too much for your knowledge because mostly the people become irritated for the excessive boasting even if it comes from and authority.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.14]]
There is no end to Ayurveda, hence one should devote himself to is constantly and without any negligence. This is worth doing. One should learn without jealousy excellence of conduct even from the enemies because for the wise the world is teacher while for the unwise it is enemy. Hence the wise, after due consideration, should hear and implement the advice which is thankful, promoting fame, life span, strength and popularity even if it comes from an enemy. Thereafter he should speak thus– you should always behave properly to gods, fire, brahmana, preceptors, elders, accomplished ones and teacher, thus this fire alongwith all the perfumes, eatables, gems and grains and aforesaid gods would bless you with prosperity, otherwise they would curse you. When the teacher has said all this, the disciple should say “yes” (I shall act accordingly). If the disciple follows the instruction then he is to be taught otherwise not. The teacher teaching such a worthy disciple obtains the aforesaid fruits of teaching and enjoins the disciple and himself with other unmentioned beneficial qualities. Thus method of teaching is said.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 29.7]]
Qualities of a good physician: of high descent, well-versed in scripture, having practical knowledge, expert, clean, skillful, self-controlled, well-equipped, having all sense organs normal, knowers of constitution and course of action.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 29.7]]
Syllabus of Required Knowledge for a Good Physician:/ Standardized Required Knowledge of Competent Physician: Such physicians are free from doubt in anatomy, embryology, physiology and pathology, and also in the distinct knowledge of etiology, prodroma, suitability in relation to curable, hardly curable, palliable and rejectable diseases; are interpr3eters of the 3-fold Ayurvedic principle [which is ...V-P-K?] with brevity as well as details alongwith the 3-fold group of drugs [which is...?]; appli4ers of 35 roots and fruits, 4 fats, 5 salts, 8 urines, 8 milks, 6 plants w3ith latex and bark, groups of drugs useful in 5 measures such as head evacuation etc. [the Pancha Karmas], 28 gruels, 32 powder-ointments, 600 evacuatives and 500 decoctives; well-acquainted with the conduct prescribed for the healthy in relation to food and drinks, standing, walking, sleeping, sitting, quantity, substances, collyrium, smoking, snuffing, massage, rubbing, non-suppression and suppression of urges, physical exercise, suitability, examination and knowledge about the sense organs and the conduct of the nobles; doubtless in 4-legged therapeutics [Dr, Drug, Nurse, Patient] with 16 qualities [which are...], nature of disease, 3 desires [health, wealth, enlightenment], knowledge about the merits and demerits of V, capable in management of 4-fold unction [fat, marrow, etc.] with 24 media [see uncting chptr] and 64 equipments [from which chptr? ]; experts in various procedures for various types of measures, such as unction, fomentation, emesis, purgation, etc.; well-versed in head-diseases etc., diseases caused by proportional variation of dosas, diminution [of doshas/ of dhatus], boils, abscess, 3 swellings, various associations of swelling, 48 locations of diseases, 140 specific diseases, the despicable over-obese and over-lean along with causes, symptoms and treatment [of them- the obese/lean], wholesome and unwholesome sleep, insomnia and over-sleep alongwith the causes and treatment, 6 measures reducing etc. [see my chart; “the 6 Actions”]; symptoms and treatment of disorders caused by over-saturation and under-nutrition; etiology, symptoms and therapeutic management of blood disorders and also of mada, murchha and samnyasa, well-acquainted with dietetic considerations, food items wholesome and unwholesome by nature, group of the best ones [foods], 84 asavas (wines), properties and actions of drugs according to rasa and anurasa, proportional variations in combination of rasas, antagonism, properties and actions of food and drinks classified in 12 groups, properties of after-drink, 9 points regarding food, movement of food, wholesome and unwholesome food along with it’s good and bad effects, the diseases located in dhatus along with their treatment, 10 seats of vital breath and the topics to be dealt with in the chapter 30 on 10 heart-rooted vessles; accordingly well- versed with brevity and details, in the entire treatise and it’s acquisition, retention, understanding, application, measures, health, time, physician and instruments and expert, while endowed with memory, intelligence, learning and rationale, in implementation not conflicting with his noble qualities and in dealing with all the living beings with friendly manner like parents, brothers and kinsmen. Endowed with such qualities, Agnivesa! are promoters of vital breath and destroyers of diseases.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.29]]
“The Physician’s excellent virtue, artha (wealth), and kama (enjoyment)”: virtue: to treat teachers, virtuous people, and family Artha (“wealth and fruition of purpose”): remuneration and protection from the king; he prevents his patients from further disease Kama (“enjoyment”): honored by learned men, respected; provides health to the liked persons

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.84]]
Cause of Misery and Happiness: Entire misery relating to both mind and body depend on ignorance, the entire happiness resides in pure knowledge

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.19]]
The physician who knows the entire body always from all aspects knows the science of life in it’s entirety which promotes happiness of the world.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.16]]
Requirements of a “knower of Ayurveda”: who are able to deliver information from memory on: Tantra (treatise; the authoritative text): Sthana (section): Adhyaya (chapter): and Prasna (topics): -this sutra:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.17]]
They should be able to deliver these distinctly by the way of: Textual Statement: (ability to recite by memory the treatises of sages in entirety, and according to tradition.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.18]]
Textual Interpretation: when one penetrates the real purport, explaining by use of expansion, brevity, proposition, reasoning, examples, correlation and conclusion; which is comprehensible to the 3 types of disciples (brilliant, average, and dull)

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.19]]
and Recapitulation: difficult points in the treatise are discussed and recapitulated.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.157]]
One who has acquired the knowledge (given by the authoritative text) based on various reasons and refuting the opponent’s view in debates, does not get fastened by the pressure of opponent’s arguments nor does he get subdued by their arguments.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.15]]
The Method of Discussion: A physician should take part is discussions with other physicians. -

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.15]]
Discussion with specialists: promotes pursuit and advancement of knowledge, provides dexterity, improves power of speaking, illumines fame, removes doubt in scriptures, if any, by repeating the topics, and crates confidence in case there is any doubt, and brings forth new ideas. The ideas memorized in study from the teacher, will become firm when applied in (competitive) discussion.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.15]]
The teacher possesses much secret ,knowledge. When he is pleased with the devoted disciple, gradually he will deliver these ideas. These same are expressed by the disciple with enthusiasm during discussion in order to gain victory. In this way, the careful student earns and retains his teacher’s knowledge.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.26-27]]
Punarvasu said: “Do not speak so [uncompromisingly] because by adherence to only one side it is very difficult to learn the truth.” “Those who place their views and arguments as decided facts can not reach the end of the controversy, but merely go round and round in a circle like an oil grinding wheel.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.32]]
Method of testing another physician’s knowledge; the 8 Topics for Debate: “One physician should, at the very start, (of a discussion with another physician; to test or quiet a quack physician) should ask the other physician about 8 topics: 1) treatise, 2) scope of the treatise, 3) section, 4) scope of the section, 5) chapter, 6) scope of the chapter, 7) topics, 8) scope of the topics. The other physician should reply dealing entirely with the subject by means of text, interpretation and recapitulation (if he is a truly good physician).”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.69-85]]
The following is from

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.69-71]]
Interrogation is the question on any subject from the treatise according to the accepted procedure. Interpretation of the interrogation is the rational solution of the same on the basis of the treatise. The word “Tantra” is derived from “tantrana” (pervasiveness and protection), “Sthana” from “arthapratistha” (containing the subject well) and the titles of adhyayas (chapters) are based on various topics. Thus according to query, the entire “Astaka” (8 topics) has been explained. In this way, the well-defined subject- matter of the text has also been said in entirety.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.72-74]]
There are persons having partial and superficial informations whose unexpected flying up creates irritation like that of male bustard. Hence, in the beginning of the talk, one should always put the 8 topics with a view to testing the superiority or inferiority because there only the well-versed in scriptures can stand while those knowing a portion of it feel giddy by the very word of the entire treatise like the weak bustards by the sound of bow-string.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.75-80]]
Some animal in the midst of the weak ones behaves like a wolf but finding a real wolf it reverts to it’s natural position. Likewise, a fool on the basis of his talkativeness, establishes his authority among the fools but is exposed in face of the real authority. Like large brown mongoose hidden in it’s own woolen bristles, what the fool having no wide knowledge can speak in discussions as a clumsy, dull one. The physician should not come in conflict with men of noble conduct though having little knowledge but should subdue the otherwise posing themselves as authority at the very start with the 8 questions. The fools often are arrogant and talkative speaking too much and irrelevantly while the gentlemen are often good-looking and talking less and relevantly. One, dispassionately, should not tolerate the little-knowing but talkative and quarrel-some persons in order to bring to light the importance of real knowledge. Those who are compassionate to creatures and are sincerely devoted to real knowledge pay attention to checking the ignoble debates

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.81-83]]
Those who are not authority in their own treatise often condemn others taking resort to ignoble views, lack of time, illness, arrogance and harshness. One should keep away from these scripture-defiles who simulate the noose of death and should be devoted to the good physicians who are full of calmness, knowledge and understanding.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.16]]
Discussion with specialists, and winning arguments: Discussion with specialists, and winning arguments: Discussion with specialists is of 2 types– friendly discussion and hostile discussion.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.17]]
The friendly discussion is held with one who is endowed with learning, understanding and the power of expression and contradiction, devoid of irritability, having uncensored knowledge, without jealousy, able to be convinced and convince others, enduring and adept in the art of sweet conversation. While discussion with such a person one should speak confidently, put questions unhesitatingly, reply to the sincere questioner with elaborateness, not be agitated whit fear of defect, not be exhilarated on defeating the partner, nor boast before others, not hold fastly his solitary view due to attachment, not explain what is unknown to him, convince the other party with politeness and be cautious in that. This is the method of friendly discussion.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.18]]
Further one should take part in hostile discussion with others looking to his superiority. Before speaking, he should examine properly the other’s speech, difference between himself and the opponent and the nature of the congregation. Proper examination guides the wise about the initiation of and desisting from work, hence the experts commend the examination. While examining the difference between himself and the opponent one should also examine the merits and demerits of the speaker properly– such as scriptural knowledge, understanding, retention, imagination and eloquence these are the merits. These are the demerits such as irritability, lack of skill, cowardice, lack of retention and carelessness. One should compare himself and the opponent in superiority in respect of these qualities.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.19]]
The opponent may be of 3 types- superior, inferior or equal, according to the above qualities and not wholly.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.152-154]]
There are 44 terms relating to terms of discussion given in this chapter.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.20]]
The 2 types Symposiums: learned or ignorant. The 3 types of Symposiums: friendly, neutral and prejudiced. In the prejudiced congregation consisting of persons endowed with learning, understanding, speaking and ‘contradication’ or of ignorant ones, one should never discuss with anybody. In the ignorant congregation, however, if it is friendly or neutral, one should discuss with another who is devoid of learning, understanding, speaking and contradication, is not famous and is despised by great men. While discussing with such a person one should use long sentences having incomprehensible and long aphorisms, should ridicule the opponent again and again with movements of hands before the gathering and should not give opportunity to him to speak, while using difficult words one should remind the opponent that he is not speaking or his proposition does not stand. Again calling him one should say– ‘You should learn for one year more, perhaps you have not learnt from a preceptor or it is sufficient for you.” The opponent, even defeated once, is taken as defeated and should not be entertained again. Some say that the same method is applicable in case of hostile discussion with a superior opponent but, in fact, confrontation with a superior person is not at all desirable.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.21]]
One should discuss with an inferior or equal opponent in a friendly congregation. In a neutral congregation having attention, hearing, learning, understanding, power of speaking and contradiction one should carefully weigh the strength and weakness of the opponent. If the opponent is stronger then he should not continue discussion giving it up without any apparent sign but where the opponent is weak he should be subdued immediately. The Means of Subduing the Inferior Opponent Immediately: The Opponent’s Weakness: Method of Subduing Him: one having no scriptural knowledge should be defeated by quoting long aphorisms one devoid of understanding by sentences with incomprehensible and long aphorisms one devoid of imagination with similar sentences having various meanings one devoid of power of speaking by contradicting the half-said sentence one devoid of skill by putting him in embarrassing situation one with irritability by teasing him one with cowardice by terrorizing him one devoid of carefulness by imposing discipline Thus by these means one should subdue the inferior opponent immediately.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.22-24]]
One should speak reasonably while in hostile discussion and should not withdraw the words once spoken. (It should be born in mind that ) a hostile speech gives rise to strong agitation in some persons. As for the angry there is nothing either ‘unactable’ or un-utterable, the wise do not commend quarreling in the congregation of noble persons. Thus one should do in discussion initiated.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.25]]
In the beginning itself one should do like this. In connivance with the congregation one should get the topic selected as is favorable to him or is very difficult for the opponent or the opponent should be given some quite adverse side. In the event of support from the congregation, he should speak– ‘I have nothing to say more, now this congregation itself will make the decision about the discussion and it’s result according to it’s choice, circumstances and views of the members’-- having said this he should keep quiet.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.26]]
The result of the discussion is recorded like this– this is worth speaking, this is not worth-speaking, because of this one is defeated.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.27]]
These terms are worth-knowing for acquaintance of the course of discussion among physicians such as– ‘vada’, dravya, guna, karma, samanya, visesa, samavaya, pratijna, sthapana, partisthapana, hetu, drstanta, upanaya, nigamana, uttara, siddhanta, sabda, pratyaksa, anumana, aitihya, aupamya, saumsaya, prayojana, savyabhicara, jijnsa, vyavasaya, arthaprapti, sambhava, anuyojya, ananuyojya, anuyoga, pratyanuyoga, vakyadosa, vakyaprasamsa, chala, ahetu, atitakala, upalambha, parihara, partijnahani, abhyanujna, hetvantara, arthantara, nigrahasthana

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.28]]
Vada (debate) is that in which one holds academic discussion with a contending opponent. This is briefly of 2 types– jalpa (positive discourse) and vitanda (negative discourse). Jalpa is the statement of speaker’s own view as well as (contradiction of) the opponent’s view. Vitanda is opposite to jalpa. For instance, one holds the view that rebirth is there while the other holds the view just against it. During debate, they advance arguments in support of their own views and expose (and contradict) the opponents’ view, this is jalpa. Vitanda is opposite to jalpa in which the speaker without having any positive approach only finds faults in the opponents view point.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.29]]
Dravya (substance), guna (properties), karma (action), samanya (similarity) visesa (dissimilarity) and samavaya (inherence)-- these are mentioned earlier alongwith their definitions in sutrasthana.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.30]]
Pratijna– Partijna (proposition) is the statement of what is to be proved. For instance, purusa (self) is eternal.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.31]]
Sthapana (establishment)- this is establishing the same proposition of firm footing with the help of hetu (reason), drstanta (instance), upanaya (correlation) and nigamana (conclusion). First there is proposition and then establishment because what can be established in absence of proposition? For instance, ‘self is eternal’ - this is a proposition, reason is - ‘because of not being created’; instance is- ‘as sky’; correlation is- ‘as the sky is uncreated and is eternal so is ‘self’; conclusion is- ‘therefore, self is eternal’. ...

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.32]]
Partisthapana (counter-establishment)- this is giving a contrary meaning to the opponent’s proposition. For instance, ‘self is non-eternal’ is proposition; reason is - ‘because of being perceived by senses’; instance is ‘As pitcher’; correlation is- ‘as pitcher is perceived by senses and is non-eternal so is ‘self’; conclusion is- ‘therefore, self is non-eternal’.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.33]]
Hetu (reason)- this is the cause of knowledge such as pratyaksa (perception), anumana (inference), aitihya (tradition) and aupamya (analogy). What is revealed by these reasons (sources) is reality.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.34]]
Drstanta (instance)-- this is that which arouses understanding in the fools and the learned alike. It presents a picturesque image of the thing. For instance, fire is hot, water is liquid, earth is stable and the sun in illuminating, as the sun is illuminating, the knowledge of the sankhya (philosophy) is also illuminating.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.35]]
Upanaya (correlation) and Nigamana (conclusion) are said under the explanation of the headings of ‘sthapana’ and ‘pratisthapana’.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.36]]
Uttara (rejoinder)-- this is the statement of dissimilarity in the reason of similarity and vice-versa. For instance, if somebody says- ‘disorders are similar to cause as “sitaka” (cold) disease has similar causes like exposure to cold wave’” the opponent might say- ‘disorders are disimilar to cause as in burning sensation, heat, sloughing and suppuration of body parts the causes are dissimilar like cold wave.[‘] This is rejoinder with contrary statements.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.37]]
Siddhanta ((theory)- this is the conclusion which is established by scientists after testing in several ways and on proving it with reasoning. This is of four types- sarvatantra siddhanta, pratitantra siddhanta, adhikarana siddhanta and adhyupagama siddhanta. Sarvatantra-siddhanta (universal theory)-- it is that which is accepted universally by all the schools such as- there are causes, there are diseases and there are remedies for the curable disorders. Pratitantra Siddhanta (restricted theory)-- this is that which is not universal in nature and is held by only one of the schools such as- in other schools there are 8 rasas but here are 6; here are 5 sense organs, while in other texts there are 6 sense organs, in other texts all diseasesa are taken as caused by V etc. but her they are taken as caused by V etc. as well as by the bhutas. Adhikarana Siddhanta (implied theory)-- this is that which is proved as implication of some other statement such as- fruits of action, emancipation, self and other world are proved in implied way from the statement “the emancipated does not take up the consequent action because of the absence of desires”. Abhyupagama Siddhanta (hypothetical theory) is that which is held up by physicians temporarily and hypothetically during debate though the idea is unproved, untested, uninstructed and irrational- such as- ‘ I will speak proposing that dravya is predominant or properties are predominant or virya is predominant.’ Thus the 4-fold theory. ...

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.39]]
Sabda (word)- this is an aggregate of letters. This is of 4 types: drstartha, adrstartha, satya and anrta. Drstartha (with observable meaning)- is that which connotes observable meanings ; such as dosas are aggravated by these etiological factors, they are pacified by 6 therapeutic measures, the sense objects (sound etc.) are perceived if the sense organs (auditory etc.) are existent. Adrstartha (with unobserving meaning)- this is that which connotes unobservable ideas such as there exists the other world, there is emancipation and so on. Satya (consistent)-- this is that which is consistent to the facts, such as there are instructions of Ayurveda, remedial measures for the curable diseases and result of action. Anrta (inconsistent)-- this is contrary to satya. -#38 Pratyaksa (perception)-- this is knowledge which is directly recieved by the self and the sense organs. Self-perceived are pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, etc., while sound etc. are perceived by the sense organs.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.40]]
Anumana (inference) is the reasoning supported by invariable concomitance such as the knowledge of agni by the power of digestion, that of strength by the power of exercise, auditory organ etc. by the perception of sound etc.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.41]]
Aitihya (tradition)-- this is the traditional authoritative source of knowledge such as veda, etc.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.42]]
Aupamya (analogy)-- this is the statement of similarity between things such as- analogy of dandaka with danda (staff), that of dhanuhsthmbha with bow and that of the provider of health with the archer.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.43]]
Samsaya (doubt)-- this is the state of indecision about the concerned entity. For instance, on observing that both types of persons having or not the signs of longevity and adopting or not the therapeutic measures- die early and live long, doubt arises as whether there is untimely death or not.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.45]]
Prayojana (object)-- this is that for which the actions are initiated. Such as- ‘if there is untimely death, I will use life-promoting measures and avoid the contrary ones. Then how would the untimely death subdue me?’ Vi8# 44 Savyabhicara (uncertain statement)-- this is that which has uncertainty. Such as ‘this medicament may or may not be applicable to this disease’.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.46]]
Jijnasa (inquiry)-- is the (curiosity about) examination. Such as- (on one’s inquiry somebody says) the examination of drugs will be described later on.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.47]]
Vyavasaya is Niscaya (decision)-- such as- this disease is certainly V, this very is the medicament for this.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.48]]
Arthaprapti (acquisition of implied sense)-- this is that where another unsaid idea is conveyed by the said one, such as when one says that the disease is not to be managed with saturating therapy it implies that it is to be managed with desaturating therapy; ‘He should not eat during the day’ implies that he should eat during the night.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.49]]
Sambhava (source of origin)-- this is that from where something is originated, such as 6 dhatus of foetus, (use of) unwholesome things of disease and (that of) wholesome things of health.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.50]]
Anuyojya (questionable statement)-- this is tahtn where sentence is defective or has unspecified meaning inviting further questions, such as if somebody says ‘the disease is to be managed with evacuative therapy’ it invites further question as to ‘whether it is to be managed with emesis or purgation.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.51]]
Ananuyojya (unquestionable statement)- this is contrary to the above. Such as- ‘this (disease) is incurable.’

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.52]]
Anuyga (question)-- this is that which is put as query ‘wholly or partly, on the text or it’s part during discussion of experts for the test of learning, understanding, speaking and contradiction; Such as- on the statement of ‘self is eternal’ somebody says ‘what is the reason’ .

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.53]]
Pratyanuyoga (counter-question)-- this is questioning the questions, such as on the above one may ask what is the reason of this question.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.54]]
Vakyadosa (syntactical defect)-- in this context, is of 5 types– Nyuna (deficiency) Adhika (superfluity) Anarthaka (meaninglessness) Aparthaka (deprivation of meaning) Viruddha (incongruity) Without these there is no damage to the contextual sense. Deficiency is such as- if there is lack of even one of the five-proposition, reason, instance, correlation and conclusion- or if there by many reasons, only one reason is resorted to for proving something. Superfluity is just contrary to deficiency such as- while talking about ayurveda one says about some irrelevant it is repeated, due to repetition this comes under superfluity. Repetition is of 2 types- semantic repetition and verbal repetition. The former consists of the repetition of the same idea by different words such as bhesaja, ausadha and sadhana (for therapy) and the latter consists of the repetition of the same word such as ‘bhesaja, bhesaja’. Meaninglessness is that where there is only jumble of alphabets devoid of any sense. Deprivation of meaning is due to lack of mutual connection of otherwise meaningful words such as- cakra-na(ta_kra-vamsa-vajra-nisakara. Incongruity is considered in relation to illustration, theory and convention. Instance and theory have already been described earlier. Now convention is of 3 types- Ayurvedic, ritual and ethical. Ayurvedic convention such as four-legged therapy, ritual convention such as animals are to be sacrificed by sacrificing persons, ethical convention such as non- violence towards all creatures. The statement incongruous in respect of the respective convention is taken as incongruity. Thus are the syntactical defects.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.55]]
Vakyaprasamsa (syntactical commendability)- this is that where the statement is free from deficiency, superfluity, is meaningful, devoid of deprivation of meaning and incongruity, and comprehensible. Further there is no room for any question. Such statement is commended.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.56]]
Chala (knavery or deceitful disputation)- this is only a jugglery of words in which the words are used knavishly, with apparent meaning or without meaning. This is of 2 types- Vakchala (verbal knavery) and Samanya Chala (knavery in general). Verbal Knavery- such as, if somebody says- ‘this physician is “navatantra”’, then the physician retorts- ‘I have no “nava” (nine) texts but have only one.’ Then the other says- ‘I am not saying that you have got nine texts but your practice in the same is “nava” (new).’ On this the physician says “I have not practiced the text newly but many times.’ This is verbal knavery. Knavery in general- such as, when somebody says- ‘medicament is for alleviating the disease.’, the other person says- ‘How do you say the existent is for alleviating the existent because disease is existent and also the medicament, if the existent is capable of alleviating the existent, then both cough and wasting being existent, cough may be able to alleviate the wasting.’ This is knavery in general.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.57]]
Ahetu (fallacious reason)- this is of 3 types- Prakaranasama (similar to topic), Samsayasama (similar to doubt), and Varnyasama (similar to object). The reason similar to topic such as- the self other than the body is eternal. On this somebody says that because the self is other than the body, it is eternal, as the body is non-eternal, the dissimilar self must be external. This is fallacious reason because here the paksa (minor term) itself has been used as a reason. The reason similar to doubt is that which though being cause of doubt is used as cause of eliminating the same such as- ‘he has said only a part of Ayurveda, it creates doubt as to whether he is a physician or not’, on this somebody says- ‘as he has said a part of Ayurveda, he is a physician’. This does not make a reason for the eliminating of the doubt, thus it is a fallacious reason because that which is the cause of doubt can’t be the cause of removing the same. The reason similar to object is that which is not different from the object such as somebody says- ‘Buddhi (intellect) is non-eternal because of the absence of touch like sabda (sound). Here both buddhi and sabda are objects, hence because of the absence of difference between them, the reason is similar to object and as such is fallacious.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.58]]
Atitakala (delayed statement)-- this is that which actually was to be said earlier but is said later, and because of delayed presentation becomes unacceptable. For instance, if somebody does not defeat the opponent at the opportune moment but applies it on some other point later on, then, because of delayed application that becomes quite ineffective.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.59]]
Upalambha– this is pointing out defects in causality as explained earlier under the heading ‘hetu’ fallacious or apparent reason.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.60]]
Parihara (refutation)-- this is refuting the above pointing out of defects. Such as signs of life are available constantly till the self is in the body, and are not available after it goes out. Therefore, the self is different from the body and is eternal.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.61]]
Pratijnahani (loss of proposition)-- this is that when one gives up the original proposition after having been questioned (by the opponent). For instance, somebody puts proposition as ‘the personal self is eternal’ in the beginning but when questioned says that it is non-eternal.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.62]]
Abhyanujna (admission of argument)-- this is acceptance of the desired as well as the undesired situations.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.63]]
Hetwantara (imperfect reason)-- is that where some imperfect reason is stated instead of some perfect reason.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.64]]
Arthantara (irrelevant statement)-- this is that where some other thing is said instead of the relevant one. For instance, one has to say the symptoms of fever but instead he says those of prameha.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.65]]
Nigrahasthana (reason of defect)-- is that by which one is defeated. It consists of not understanding a thing even in repeated thrice in a learned assembly or questioning where it is not pertinent and not questioning where it is pertinent. Over and above, pratijnahani, abhyanujna, kaslatitavacana, ahetu, nyuna, adhika, vyartha, anarthaka, punarukta, viruddha, hetwantara and arthantara are reasons of defeat.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.66]]
Thus the terms used in course of debate are explained as proposed.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.67]]
The debate among physicians should be held only on (topics of) Ayurveda and not elsewhere. Here the statements and counter-statements in details and also all the arguments have been mentioned in the entire text. After keeping them in mind one should speak something and not anything which is irrelevant, unscriptural, unexamined, inappropriate, confused or unpervasive. He should speak everything with reasoning. All the conflicts of debate, if endowed with reasoning are devoid of malice and promote the (cause of) medicine due to it’s property of enhancing the excellence of intellect, because undamaged intellect leads to success of actions.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.68]]
Now I shall explain some topics for the knowledge of physicians because the wise commend initiation of all actions with prior knowledge. If after knowing well kaarana, karana, karyayoni, karya, karyaphala, anubandha, desa, kala, pravrtti and upaya one proceeds for some action, he obtains the desired fruit and subsequent benefit in that without any great effort.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.69]]
Karana [(Kaarana- long A-)] (doer)-- is that who does a thing, he is the cause of and the agent.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.70]]
Karana (instrument) is that which serves as equipment for the doer making effort for performing action.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.71]]
Karayoni (original source) is that which is converted into action after transformation.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.72]]
Karya (act) is that with the object of performing which the doer proceeds.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.73]]
Karyaphala (result of act)- is that with the object of which the action is performed.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.74]]
Anubandha (after-effect)- is that which essentially enjoins the doer as after-effect, good or bad, of the action.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.75]]
Desa (place) is location.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.76]]
Kala (time) is transformation.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.77]]
Pravrtti (inclination)- is the effort for the action. This is also known as kriya, karma, yatna, karyasamarambha.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.78]]
Upaya (procedure) is excellence of the first 3 factors, karana, etc. and their proper management leaving aside the karya, karyaphala, and anubandha. Procedure leads to performance of an action and thus it is said as upaya. After the action is performed there is no function of procedure nor is it at the time of performance; after action is the result and thereafter consequence (so after action also procedure has no role).

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.79]]
These 10 entities should be examined first and thereafter one should proceed for action. Hence the physician desirous of taking up action should before-hand examine the entire situation by proper methods and then initiate the action.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.80]]
There, if some other physician or person asks this physician- ‘How many types of examination should be adopted by the physician desirous of applying emesis, purgation, non-unctuous and unctuous enema and head-evacuation? How many types of entities are to be examined? How are they to be examined? What is the object of examination? Where are emesis etc. to be applied or contra-indicated? What is to be done in combination of the situations for both application and contra-indication? What drugs are useful for emesis etc.?

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.81]]
If he wants to confuse the questioner he should say- ‘there are many types of examination and groups of the types of entities to be examined. Kindly tell me from what point of view grouped examination or entities to be examined you mean because I can’t satisfy you if I explain them taking as grouped from another point of view when, in case, you want to be explained them as grouped from another point of view.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.82]]
After considering the reply given by him, one should further say according to the method of contradiction. IN case, he speaks, properly one should not try to confuse him, rather he should examine him fully and sincerely.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 8.83]]
There are 2 types of examination for those who have already acquired the (scriptural) knowledge- perceptive and inference. These 2 alongwith the authoritative instruction constitute the (means of) examination. This examination is of 2 types or of 3 types including authoritative instruction.
