# Healthy Living

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.15-19]]
Section 4: Healthy Living Daily Routine p.200 Right Conduct p.212 Food p.224 Chart of Foods p.234 After-drinks, Antagonistic foods, etc. p.282 Daily Routine Collyrium smoking, snuffing + anutaila, tooth brush, mouth-refreshing, oil gargle, oleation of head, oleation of ears, oily massage of the body, foot oil massage, body oil massage, bath, clean clothing, perfume+ garland, gem+ ornament, cleaning feet + excretory orifices, shaving+ hair dressing, footwear, umbrella, stick. Function of the daily routine: serves to prevent disease, strengthen tissues and sense organs Daily Routine Routine to Benefits: Guidelines/ be done: Comments: Collyrium: “The vision brightens undisturbed like “Sauvira Anjana” ([a normal, ([Eye moon in clear sky by collyrium, eye soothing and tonic] collyrium) Drops]) drops, etc” should be applied daily to the eyes. “Rasanjana” “The vision improves just as gold and (a mercurial collyrium) should be other metals become brilliantly clean applied once every five or eight days after polishing with oil, cloth and for stimulating secretion. brush.” Notes: “vision is

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.20-55]]
Dictionary def. of ‘Collyrium’: predominant in P, hence it is -from greek “kollyrian”-pessiary, eye particularly susceptible to K; the salve measures alleviating K are beneficial -from “kollyra”- a roll of bread for clarifying the vision.” [suggesting Charaka’s collyriums are a [confirm this statement in Charaka.] soft pessiary or pill or stick which is “A sharp collyrium rubbed on the eye and melted.] should not be applied at day, -an eye lotion because the vision already weak due -an eye wash to evacuation is further depressed by the sun; evacuative collyrium should be applied only at night. Smoking: Benefits of smoking: increased strength Formula: harenuka, priyangu, of hairs, skull, sense organs and voice. prthvika, kesara, nakha, hribera, Also, the person used to oral smoking candana, patra, twak, ela, usira, does not fall prey to supraclavicular pakmaka, dhyamaka, madhuka, diseases of V an K nature, however mamsi, guggulu, aguru, sarkara, bark strong they are. of nyagrodha, udumbara, aswattaha, Disorders alleviated by plaksa and lodhra, vanya, sarjarasa, smoking: heaviness and pain in head, musta, saileya, kamala, utpala, chronic rhinitis, hemicrania, earache, srivestaka, sallaki and sthauneyaka

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.20-55]]
pain in eyes, cough, hiccup, dyspnoea, all these should be ground and spasm in throat, weakness of teeth, pasted on a reed so as to make it a discharge due to disorders of ear, nose suppository, barley-shaped, thumb- and eyes, foetid smell from nose and like and of eight fingers in length. mouth, toothache, anorexia, spasm in The person should take this jaw and back neck, itching, worms, suppository when dried and with pale-face, excessive salivation, free interior, put it on the smoking disorders of voice, tonsillitis, enlarged pipe and having added some fat and uvula, alopecia, gray hairs, hair falling, fire should smoke as a daily routine sneezing excessive drowsiness, lack of for happiness. functioning of intellect, excessive Unctuous smoking: One sleep. should use unctuous smoking made of useful drugs of sweet group added properly with muscle fat, ghee and wax. Smoking: Number: Smoking should be done (continued) thrice with three puffs each. During the times of the day the wise should smoke twice as daily routine, once for unctuous and thrice or four times for evacuative effect. Times: Eight times prescribed as a daily routine

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.20-55]]
because at these times V and K gets aggravated. They are: after baths, meals, vomiting, sneezing, tooth brushing, snuffing, use of collyrium and sleep. Procedure: Smoke by in haling in through the nostrils for disorders located in the head, nose and eyes. Smoke by inhaling in through the mouth for disorders located in the throat. However, never exhale/emit the smoke through the nose, as “the smoke traversing reversely damages the eyes immediately” One should smoke through one nostril closing the other one three rounds, thrice in each round, cautiously while sitting comfortably with straight body and eyes and concentration of mind. Features of the Pipe: Length: 24 fingers long (using one’s own fingers) for evacuative smoking 32 for unctuous smoking 36 for routine smoking Design: straight, having three pouches and nozzle of the measure of the jujube stone. “Smoke coming out from distance, intervened by nodes and diluted by pipe channel and used in proper dose and time does not damage the sense organs”. Smoking: Material: similar as (continued) for recommended for enema pipe Smoking Formula: harenuka, priyangu, prthvika, kesara, nakha, hribera, candana, patra, twak, ela, usira, pakmaka, dhyamaka, madhuka, mamsi, guggulu, aguru, sarkara, bark of nyagrodha, udumbara, aswattaha, plaksa and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.20-55]]
lodhra, vanya, sarjarasa, musta, saileya, kamala, utpala, srivestaka, sallaki and sthauneyaka- all these should be ground and pasted on a reed so as to make it a suppository, barley-shaped, thumb-like and of eight fingers in length. The person should take this suppository when dried and with free interior, put it on the smoking pipe and having added some fat and fire should smoke as a daily routine for happiness. Complications of improper smoking: deafness, blindness, dumbness, internal hemorrhage, and vertigo. Voice is not clear, throat is full of K and head is cold and heavy. Complications of excessive smoking: palate, head and throat dry up with heat sensation, the person gets thirsty and fainted, bleeding is increased, excessive giddiness and fainting and dysfunction of sense organs. Treatment of improper smoking: intake of ghee, snuff, collyrium and saturating diet. Treatment should be unctuous if V follows P, cold in raktapitta, and roughening in K-P. Contra-indications for smoking: after purgation, enema and bleeding, when afflicted with poison, anxiety, pregnant, in cases of fatigue, narcosis, ama, pitta, Smoking: vigil, fainting, giddiness, thirst, (continued) emaciation, injury; after taking wine, milk, fatty substances, and honey, food with curd; in conditions of roughness, anger, dryness of palate, defects of vision, head injury, temporal head disorder, rohini, prameha and alcoholism. Smoking in these situations and wrong times

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.56]]
aggravates the disorders severely. Signs of proper smoking: well cleaning of heart, throat and sense organs, lightness of head and pacification of V + K. Chest, throat and head attain lightness and K is diluted. For evacuation of the head: the smoking made of sweta, jyotismati, orpiment, realgar and the aromatic substances like aguru etc. should be used. Snuff: “Every year one should use Anutaila “Anutaila”; Benefits: vision, smell and hearing are through snuff three times a day in “(through not effected, hairs or beard and early rains, autumn and spring, when snuff)”. mustache do not become white or gray, the sky is free from clouds (not instead of balding hairs grow overcast).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.56-70]]
abundantly; alleviation of stiffness in backneck, headache, facial paralysis, Anutaila Formula: lockjaw, chronic rhinitis, migraine and Candana, aguru, patra, head tremors. Veins, joints, ligaments daruharidra (bark), madhuka, bala

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.71-74]]
and tendons of skull attain greater prapaundarika, suksma, ela, vidanga, strength on saturation through snuffing. bilwa, utpala, hribera, usira, kaivarta Face becomes cheerful and well- musta, sariva salaparni, kesara- these developed, voice melodious, stable and drugs should be boiled in hundred grave. Freedom from defects and times pure rein water and the increased strength are bestowed upon remaining decoction which is ten all sense-organs. He is not attacked times of oil should be taken. With suddenly by disorders of parts above this decoction the oil should be jatru and even in advanced years, old cooked ten times adding equal age does not effect strength in his head. quantity of goat’s milk in the tenth cooking. This is the method (of preparation) of anutaila t be used as snuff. Directions for use [of the Anutaila formula, given above]: This oil should be used in dose of half pala (20 ml). After oleating and fomenting head parts, the snuff should be taken thrice with a cotton swab on every third day for a week. During this period, the person should keep himself in wind- free and warm place, should take wholesome food and having control on sense organs. Benefits of using this Formula: destroyer of tridosha and strength-giving to sense organs. Teeth Benefits: removes foul smell, The toothbrush: Use astringent, Cleaning: tastelessness and taking out dirt brings pungent, and bitter teeth-cleaning relish immediately. twigs for brushing the teeth. [A fresh twig is made into a toothbrush by crushing the end so as to create a frayed, fibrous brush free from splinters.]

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.75]]
Plants recommended for toothbrush: “karanja, karavira, arka, jati, kakubha, asana and similar plants” Tongue Function: the dirt which is Construction: should be made of Scrapers: collected at the root of the tongue and gold, silver, copper, tin and brass, which creates obstruction in respiration and should be non-sharp and curved produces foul smell, hence one should (U-shaped).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.76-77]]
scrape the tongue. Mouth One desiring of clarity, relish and should keep in the mouth the fruits Refreshing: fragrance of jati, katuka, puga and lavanga; kakkola (fruit), auspicious leaves of betel, exudate of camphor and fruits

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.78-80]]
of smaller cardamom. Oil Gargle: provides strength in jaws and voice, development of face, maximum taste and relish in food. One does not suffer from dryness of throat, lip- cracking, tooth cavities, pain in teeth, over-sensitivity of teeth on taking

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.81-83]]
sour taste; teeth become firm-rooted, able to chew even the hardest food items. Oiling of Benefits: does not suffer from [Frequency: to be done daily] the Head: headache, alopecia, greying of hair or balding. Other benefits: strength of skull-parts , hairs become firmly- rooted, long and black, sense organs become cheerful, the face gets a

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.84]]
cheerful glow, sound sleep, happiness. Oiling of Benefits: ear diseases due to V, Frequency: to be done daily. the Ears: stiffness of backneck and jaws, hard hearing and deafness do not occur.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.85-89]]
Oil Benefits: makes the body strong, firm, Frequency: “regularly”. Massage of smooth-skinned, free from disturbances the Body: of V and tolerant of exertions and exercise. The body does not become affected much even if subjected to accidental injuries, or strenuous work. Person is endowed with pleasant touch, trimmed body parts and becomes

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.90-92]]
strong, charming and least effected by old age. V is predominant in tactile sense, which is located in the skin. Hence, regular oiling of the skin prevents invasion of V through that route. Oil Benefits: coarseness, stiffness, Massage of roughness, fatigue and numbness of the Feet: feet are alleviated quickly. Delicacy, strength and firmness in feet, clarity of vision are attained and V is pacified. Sciatica, cracking of soles and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.93]]
constriction of veins and ligaments do not recur Rubbing of Benefits: alleviates foul smell, Procedure: -not listed- Note: the Body: heaviness, drowsiness, itching, dirt, I presume this would be rubbing anorexia, and vulgar appearance of with either A: silk gloves/Turkish sweat. towel, or B: rubbing with an herbal

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.94]]
paste/ powder such as sandalwood, chickpea, and ginger paste. Bathing: Benefits: purifying, aphrodisiac, life-promoting, destroyer of fatigue, sweat and dirt, resuscitative and a good

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.95]]
promoter of Ojas. Clean Benefits: enhances charm, fame, life Frequency: yes, frequently. clothing: span; removes inauspiciousness, [(and always put on clean clothing produces pleasure, auspiciousness and after bathing.)] eligibility for a congregation (to get

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.96]]
together with others) perfume+ Benefits: aphrodisiac, produces good garland: smell, longevity, charm, nourishment and strength, pleasing manners and destroys inauspiciousness.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.97]]
gem+ Benefits: promotes wealth, ornament auspiciousness, longevity, prosperity; destroys calamity, produces happiness

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.98]]
charms, and Ojas. cleaning Benefits: promotes intelligence, purity, Frequency: yes, frequently. feet + longevity, and destroys [a few times per day.] excretory inauspiciousness and dirt. orifices

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.99]]
shaving+ Benefits: nutritive, aphrodisiac, life- hair promoter, provides cleanliness and dressing beautification.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.100]]
footwear: Benefits: beneficial for eye-sight and tactile sense organ, avoids injury of feet, promotes strength, ease in display

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.101]]
of energy and libido. umbrella: Benefits: alleviates natural calamities, provides strength, protection, covering and well being, guards against the sun

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.102]]
wind, dust, and rains. stick: Benefits: supports a slipping person, averts enemies, gives strength and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.103]]
longevity, and destroys fears. [What would Charaka say about modern day people carrying guns for self-protection? ] Healthcare, Use caution in ones daily health livelihood duties.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.104]]
1) Take up livelihood acceptable to social and religious ethics, and then 2) pursue a life of peace and study.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.31-33]]
Exercise: Benefits: the bodily movement which is Guidelines: Practice in meant for producing firmness. moderation. Results: lightness, capacity to work, firmness, tolerance of difficulties, diminution of impurity and stimulation of agni.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.35]]
Results of excess:

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.3-4]]
fatigue, exhaustion, emaciation, thirst, internal hemorrhage, darkness before eyes, cough, fever and vomiting. Signs of proper amount: perspiration, increased respiration, lightness of the organs, feeling of obstruction in the cardiac region, etc.. Contra-indications for: those who are much emaciated due to sexual indulgence, weight- carrying, traveling on foot, and evacuative measures; victims of anger, fear, exhaustion; the children, the old, those with aggravated V, those who speak too much and loudly; are hungry or thirsty. General rule for daily routine: One should invariably apply those things which are opposite to qualities of place, time, and self. Natural Urges: The wise should not suppress the natural urges.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.5-24]]
Symptoms and Treatment of Suppressing the Natural Urges: Urge: Symptoms when Suppressed: Treatment: urination pain n urinary bladder and passage, dysuria, fomentation, tub-bath, massage, and headache, bending, stiffness in groins, “dropping of ghee”. Also 3 types of Basti and catheterization. [unctuous enema, un-unctuous enema, and urethral enema] Defecation colic pain, headache, retention of flatus and fomentation, massage, tub-bath, feces, cramps in calf muscles, flatulence suppositories, food and drinks and enema having carminative action. Semen pain in penis and scrotum, body-ache, pain in Massage, tub-bath, wines, chicken, [ejaculation cardiac region, obstruction in urine. rice, milk, non-unctuous enema and of excited/ sexual intercourse. aroused/ impelled semen during intercourse] Flatus retention of feces, urine, and flatus; flatulence, oleation, fomentation, suppositories, pain, exhaustion, and other disorders of the food and drinks and enema having abdomen due to V. carminative action. Vomiting itching, urticarial rashes, anorexia, blackish Induction of vomiting after feeding, spots on face, swelling, anemia, fever, skin smoking, fasting (or light diet), blood diseases, nausea and erysipelas. letting, rough diet, physical exercises and purgation . Sneezing stiffness of backneck, headache, facial paralysis, massage in head-neck region, migraine, weakness of sense organs fomentation, smoking, nasal drops, V- pacifying diet, and post-meal intake of ghee. Eructation hiccup, dyspnoea, anorexia, tremors, obstruction similar to hiccup (see Hikka chapter) in cardiac region and chest yawning bending, convulsion, contraction, numbness, alleviating V tremors, shaking of the body hunger emaciation, weakness, disorder of complexion, Fatty, warm and light diet body-ache, anorexia, giddiness. thirst dryness of throat and mouth, deafness, fatigue, cold and saturating drinks depression, cardiac pain, tears coryza, eye diseases, heart diseases, anorexia, sleep, wines and pleasing talks giddiness sleep yawning, body-ache, drowsiness, head gently pressing the body disorders, heaviness in eyes breathing gaseous tumor, heart diseases, fainting rest, measures alleviating V due to exercise this whole chart

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.36-38]]
Right Conduct Nature of normal vs. wise people Right vs. wrong actions Eliminating bad habits The 3 goals of life- life, wealth, enlightenment Right conduct The best actions *Attaining the full life-span *Argument against pre-determined life-span Code of conduct Qualities of the normal people: covered in Rajas (desire/attachment) and Tamas (ignorance), they prefer the liked objects, and the temporarily-pleasing objects.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.36-38]]
(“Thus they suffer from various disorders of the body and mind.”)

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.39-40]]
Due to intellectual error, he indulges in unwholesome sense objects, suppression of natural urges and taking up risky jobs.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.56-57]]
People to Avoid: those with vicious action, speech and thought, informers, quarrelsome, those who ridicule the vulnerable points (the marmas??), the greedy, envious of other’s prosperity, crooked, those who indulge in blackmailing others, the unstable, those who serve the enemy, cruel, those who have given up the virtuous path.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.36-38]]
Qualities of the wise: endowed with learning, intelligence, memory, dexterity, restraint, regular use of wholesome regimen, purity of speech, serenity of mind and patience. (Thus they do not suffer from disorders.)

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.58-59]]
People to keep company with: those endowed with wisdom, learning, age, good conduct, memory and balanced mind, aged, those having company of the aged, knowers of nature, free from pains, good looking to all, peaceful; those who have taken some (virtuous) vow, preachers of good conduct, those whose narratives [talk] and sight [appearance] are virtuous-these should be kept company with humility and sense of service.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.8]]
*Instructions for Health (Balanced Dhatus), In a Nut Shell: Proper use of actions and food preparations contrary to the properties of place, time and the self, avoidance of excessive, perverted and negative use of time, intellect and sense objects, non-suppression of impelled urges and avoidance of over-exertion; this is, in a nut shell, the code of conduct for the healthy in order to maintain equilibrium.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.46]]
Wrong Action: The act which has undesirable consequence presently or afterwards in association should not be done, this is the view of the wise men.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.35]]
“The wise should not indulge excessively in physical exercise, laughter, speech, traveling on foot, sexual intercourse, and night vigil, even if he is accustomed to them.” “One who indulges in these or similar other activities perishes suddenly like a lion trying to drag an elephant.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.26-29]]
Unhealthy Urges which should be suppressed: The urges of evil venture related to thought, speech or action.: greed, grief, fear, anger, vanity, shamelessness, envy, excessive attachment, desire for taking another’s property; speech which is harsh, betraying, lie and untimely used; any bodily actions causing pain to others like adultery, theft and violence;

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.34-35]]
Eliminating Bad Habits: One desirous of happiness should follow the regimen prescribed for the prevention of unborn and alleviation of born disorders. Although activities of all creatures are directed intuitively towards happiness, the good and bad course they adopt depend upon the knowledge and ignorance respectively.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.36-37]]
The wise person should alienate himself from bad habits and adopt good habits in the following way: Phase 1: (day 1) alienation and adoption is done in 1/4 portion. Phase 2: (day 2) alienation and adoption is done to a further portion. Successive phases: done at 2 or 3 day intervals. “Thus faults are removed permanently and merits become unshakable.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.3]]
PROGRAM TO AVOID DISEASE: The 3 desires: life, wealth, and for the other world (liberation) (Su ch11, p.70) -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 10.4]]
On life: this is the first desire to be followed, because on departure of life, everything departs. It is maintained by observing code of conduct. Disease is removed through non-carelessness Following these, plus maintaining the vital power gives long life. -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 10.5]]
On Wealth: Should be sought second only to life there is nothing so sinful as a long life with no means of sustenance the means: agriculture, animal husbandry, trade and commerce, government, etc. and other such works which are not discarded by noble persons and are promoters of livelihood -such works one should start doing. By working this way, one lives a long life without any dishonor.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.26-32]]
ON the other World (and how to give up Atheism and Embrace Reincarnation): The wise person should give up negativistic approach and also vacillation; the scope of perception is very limited, while the scope of the imperceptible is very large, but is known by scriptures, inference, and reasoning. “For the negativist whose consciousness has been injured by accepting the theory of chance, there is no examination, one to be examined, doer, cause, gods, sages, accomplished persons, action, result of action and also the self. This holding up of negativism is the worst among sinful.” Hence the learned should give up this view leading to bad path and should see all in reality with the lamp of knowledge provided by noble persons. ½

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.33]]
More Right Conduct: One should attend to the religious scriptures, and the duties prescribed by these same, such as: Service of the teacher, study, performance of rites, marriage, reproduction, supporting servants, worship of guests, charity, refraining from desire of taking another’s property, penance, refraining from envy, benevolent acts of body, speech and mind, constant examination of body, sense organs, mind, objects, intellect and self and also concentration of mind. One should also take up such other works which are un-despised by noble persons, beneficial for heaven and which promote livelihood. Acting so one attains fame here and heaven hereafter. Remain in touch with the experts and know well the self, place, clan, time, strength and capacity. 46

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.51-55]]
Exogenous diseases of body and mind are caused by errors of intellect. Therefore, follow these rules : forsake intellectual errors, pacify sense organs, memory, sound knowledge of place, time and self ; follow the code of good conduct; and good knowledge of the advice of authorities.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 17.119]]
The self-controlled person, observing himself as always surrounded by enemies, should always cautiously manage himself with a desire to have a long life.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 11.35]]
3 Sub-pillars (of life) diet, sleep, celibacy

[[cite: Sutrasthana 30.15]]
Best Actions Chart: Best life-promoting factor: non-violence Best strength-promoting factor: prowess Best bulk-promoting factor: learning Best happiness-promoting factor: control on senses Best pleasure-promoting factor: knowledge of reality Best among paths: celibacy this chart

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.29-32]]
Attaining the Full Life-Span: Attaining the Full Life-Span: Lifespan of Humans: Life-span may be determined. The stability of life-span of all living beings depends on their personal daiva and purusakara.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.29-32]]
2 Factors effecting Life-span: Daiva: deed self-done in the previous life Purusakara: deed self-done in the present life

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.29-32]]
The 3 Grades of Daiva and Purusakara: Superior Daiva and Superior Purusakara together results in a long, happy and ‘determined’ [semi-guaranteed to be long] life-span. Inferior Daiva and Inferior Purusakara together result in a short, unhappy and un-determined [no guarantee on continued life or strength] life-span. Medium grade Daiva and Medium grade Purusakara result in a medium life-span, moderate happiness and somewhat-determined life-span.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.33]]
Relevant Dominance: Weak Daiva may be subdued by Purusakara (which is stronger). But by distinguished Daiva, Purusakara is subdued.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.38]]
Method of attaining the desired life-span: The great sages try to obtain the desired life-span by penance. Wholesome regimen is the basis of life; contrary is that of death. Timely Death: An axle fitted in a vehicle which is endowed with all the natural quantities carries on and perishes in time by depreciation of it’s normal limit; similarly, the life-span in a body of a person having strong constitution and managed properly gets it’s end and loss of its normal limit. Such death is known as timely. On the other hand, the same axle gets destroyed in the way due to overload, uneven road, want of road, breaking of wheels, defects in vehicle or driver, separation of the bolt, non-lubrication and throwing about, similarly the life-span comes to end in the middle.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.38]]
The life-span in a body of a person having strong constitution and managed properly gets it’s end and loss at it’s normal limit (100 years). Causes of untimely death: Life-span comes to an end in the middle due to over-exertion, diet not in accordance with agni, irregular meals, complicated body postures, over-indulgence in intercourse, company of ignoble persons, suppression of impelled urges, non-suppression of suppressible urges, infliction with organisms, poisonous winds and fire, injury and avoidance of food and medicaments. Also due to fever etc. due to faulty management.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.33-35]]
Argument Against Pre-determined Life-span: [...Weak daiva is subdued by the stronger purusakara. Likewise, by the distinguished daiva purusakara is subdued...] Observing this some hold the determined span of life, but, in fact, some superior deeds exhibit results determined in time while others have such determination in time. This is known by observation.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 3.36]]
Hence because both types of causes are observed one-sided view is not correct. I will explain it with examples. If there be determined life-span for all there would not be any necessity to apply mantras, herb-roots, gems, auspicious rites, offerings, gifts, oblations, observance of rules, expiation, fasting, blessings, bowing, visit to temples etc. with a desire for longevity nor there be any need to avoid excited, fierce and moving cows, elephants, camels, asses, horses, buffalo and terrific winds etc. Likewise, one would not abstain from water falls, mountains, uneven and difficult places and strong water current, from careless, insane, excited, fierce and unstable persons and those inflicted with confusion and greed; from enemies, from furious fire, from various poisonous reptiles, serpents etc. from over-exertion, from behavior unsuited to place and time, and from king’s wrath, because these and other similar factors should not be destructive because of entire life having been determined span. Moreover, the living beings who have not practiced the alleviative measures against the happening of untimely death should not be subjected to such happening; all the talks of great sages for initiation and knowledge of application in the chapter of rasayana [Chikitsasthana; in context of treatment of specific diseases] would be useless; even Indra should not be able to kill with thunderbolt his enemy with determined life-span; why should Aswins treat the patient with therapeutic measure? Why should the great sages try to obtain the desired life-span by penance? It would also not be necessary for the great sages along with the lord of the gods (Indra), who already know all that is worth knowing, to ses, to instruct and to behave properly. Excellent among all the visions is the one pertaining to Indra, which is possessed by us as well, with this it is observed like this– there is dissimilarity in life-span of thousands of persons who are those not indulged in fighting battles; similarly in those who counteract or do not counteract the disease immediately after it is arisen; there is also dissimilarity in life-span of those who take poison or not; there is no similar fate of the jars carrying water and those in pictures (or kept only for decoration). Hence wholesome regimen is the basis of life and the contrary is that of death. Over and above, orderly and proper use of food and activities which are contrary to the properties of place, time and self, abstaining from excessive, negative and perverted use in respect of all (time, action and senses), holding up of psychic excesses (emotions), non-suppression of natural impelled urges, avoidance of over-exertion we take these as the cause for continuance of health and accordingly also instruct and observe properly.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.28]]
(on Life-span): My view on existence and non-existence of timely and untimely death is like this– some say whoever dies does so in time because there is no gap in time. This is not correct as there is no point in discussion about the gap or otherwise with regard to time because time has got its own characters due to nature. Others say– when somebody dies is his fixed death time. Death is true for all beings because of equal dealing. This also is wrong interpretation of fact. Equal dealing does not mean that there is none who does not die. The present context is the time which relates to the span of life. If one holds that the time when somebody dies is the time of death for him, then according to this all entities would be determined in respect of time but this is not correct because it is observed that the result of untimely food, speech and action is harmful otherwise useful. Moreover, there is clear usage of “time” and “un-time” in relation to different conditions and entities such as– this is the time or not for this disease, food, medicament, therapy and remission. Even in common usage they say- it rains timely or untimely, this cold weather is timely or untimely, that heat spell is untimely or untimely, flowering and fruiting of plants is happening in time or otherwise and so on. Hence both are true– timely death and untimely death. There is no scope for any exclusive view. If there be no untimely death and all would have determined life-span, then in that case there would not be any purpose of the knowledge of the wholesome and the un-wholesome. Over and above, perception, inference and testimony would not be recognized as means of valid knowledge which are recognized as such in all the scriptures and which provide knowledge about the factors conducive or otherwise to life-span. Therefore, the sages hold the view that there is no untimely death is only a jugglery of words.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.29]]
During this age [], the normal life-span is 100 years.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.30]]
This depend on excellence of constitution, body constituents, the self along with the use of suitable things.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 8.30-33]]
Code of Good Conduct: Benefits of Following the Code of Good Conduct: One who follows the code of good conduct for the healthy lives a life of 100 years without any abnormality. He is praised by the noble people, fills up the human world with his fame, acquires virtue and wealth, earns friendship of all living beings, and at the end (of his life), with holy acts, gets into the virtuous other world.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 8.18-29]]
Code of Good Conduct: Worship gods, cow, brahmanas, preceptors, elderly people, accomplished and teachers. Honor fire (with oblation) put on auspicious herbs wash twice daily clean excretory passages and feet frequently cutting hair, shave and nail cutting done 3x/fortnight (14 days?) Always wear un-torn clothes use flowers and fragrance dress should be gentle, style of hair as commonly practiced apply oil to head, ear, nose, and feet daily smoke take initiative in talk remain cheerful have presence of mind even if in difficult circumstances, offer oblation, perform religious sacrifices, donate pay respect to road crossings offer balis (religious offerings) entertain guests offer pindas *rice balls) to forefathers speak useful, measured, sweet and meaningful words be self-controlled, self-virtuous jealous in cause and not in effect free form anxiety, fearless, shy, wise, courageous, skillful, forbearing, religious, positivist devoted to teachers, accomplished persons and those superior in modesty, intellect, learning, clan, and age. Walk having umbrella, stick, turban and footwear and looking 6 feet forward. Adopt auspicious conduct avoid places with dirty cloth, bones, thorns, impure articles, hairs, chaff, garbage, ash, skull, and of bath and sacrifice. Discontinue exercise before fatigue behave like kith and kin to all living beings pacify the angry, console the frightened, help the poor, be truthful, peaceful, tolerant of other’s harsh words, remover of intolerance, always look at the qualities of peaceful life alleviate causes of attachment and aversion always keep his constitution in mind be confident of the effect of a cause and as such should always initiate the cause touch water reciting the mantras “agnirme napagacchet”, etc. After touching the lips and feet, one should touch with water all the orifices in the head, and location of self, heart and head. Be devoted to celibacy, knowledge, charity, friendship, compassion, cheerfulness, indifference, and calmness. (Code of conduct, continued) One should not: tell a lie take other’s possessions desire for other women or other’s property be inclined to enmity indulge in sexual acts be vicious even to sinner speak of other’s faults try to know other’s secrets keep company of the un-virtuous, hated by kings, lunatics, fallen persons, fetus-killers, wretched and wicked ascend on defective vehicles sit on hard seat of knee height sleep on a bed not covered with bed-sheet, having no pillow, not sufficiently big, or uneven move on uneven tops of mountains climb on a tree take dip in waters with strong currents tread on the shadow of own kin or those of noble family move around the place with fare menace laugh loudly release flatus with sound set in yawning, sneezing or laughter with uncovered mouth deform the nose, grind the teeth, sound the nails, strike the bones, scrape the earth, cut the grass, press the earthen lump, perform any abnormal action in body parts see light and undesirable impure and inauspicious objects [very light objects may include TV and computer screens, etc.] produce any abnormally loud sound at the sight of corpse tread on the shadow of sacred or otherwise person during nights, stay for long in temples, sacred place, raised platforms, crossroads, gardens, cremation ground and place of execution enter alone in a deserted house or a forest attached to women, friends and servants with sinful conduct antagonize superiors be attached to inferior persons take interest in crooked things take shelter with ignoble create fear indulge in undue courage, excessive sleep, night vigils, bath, drinks, and food stay for long with knees up move towards fierce animals and those having prominent teeth and horns get exposure to easterly winds, sun, dews and excessive winds initiate quarrels worship fire except in lonely and pure conditions (Code of conduct, continued) hat [hold/ keep/ put] his body in downward position ne should not take bath naked and except being free from exhaustion and having sprinkled over the face first, should not touch the head with bathing cloth, nor should strike at the hair tips nor put on the same cloths after bathing.” Go out without touching the gems, ghee, the respectable, the auspicious and flowers go through keeping the respectable and auspicious on the left and others on right side. Eat without wearing gems on hand, without taking a bath, with damaged clothes, without reciting mantras, without offering oblation to gods, without making offerings to forefathers, without offering food to preceptor, guests and dependents, without purifying fragrance and garland, without washing hands, feet and face , with unclean mouth, facing north, depressed in mind, having disloyal, undisciplined, unclean and hungry attendants, unclean plates in improper untimely and in crowded surroundings, without making offering first to fire, without sprinkling with water, without purifying with mantras, with contempt, dirty meal served by the opponents take stale things except meat, salad, dry vegetables, fruits and hard eatables [Interpretation: these items may be kept and eaten again at a second or later meal; they need not be prepared fresh for each meal.] eat full amounts of : curd, honey, salt, roasted grain flour and ghee take curd at night take roasted grain flour singly, in night, after meals, excessively, twice, interrupted with water intake and tearing with teeth. Sneeze, eat or sleep in curved position engage in other works while performing a natural urge excrete sputum, flatulence, feces and urine in front of wind, fire, water, the moon, the sun, brahmanas and preceptors urinate on the road, in crowded place and while taking food let out nasal secretion at time of recital of mantras, oblations, studies, religious and auspicious acts insult woman have too much faith in women disclose secrets to women, nor endow her with authority perform intercourse with a menstruating woman or woman having some disease, impure, inauspicious, with undesirable appearance, behavior and attendance; unskilled, not favorable, having no lust or lust for another person, other’s woman, in female organ of others than human being, in absence of female organ (by artificial means), n sacred place, raised platform, cross roads, gardens, cremation ground, execution place water-reservoir, medicine store and in houses of brahmanas, preceptors and temples, in dawn an dusk, on prohibited days, while unclean, having not taken aphrodisiac medicine, without fixed determination, without having intense erection, without food or having taken food excessively, in uneven place, pressed with the urges of urine and feces, suffering from fatigue, physical exercise, fasting and exhaustion and in place having no privacy. Insult noble persons and preceptors perform spells, worship of the sacred place and honorable persons and study while unclean (code of conduct, continued) study when there is un-seasonal lightning, quarters look as if they are lighted during outbreak of fire, earth quake, grand festivals, fall of meteors, eclipse of big planets (solar or lunar), on the date of new moon, in dawn and dusk, without having been instructed by the preceptor’s mouth, pronounce words in low, high, weak or deranged voice, without proper accents, neither too fast nor too slow, with excessive impotency and neither with to high nor too low pitch of sound. Be impatient or over-exhilarated be one who has not supported his attendants, confided in his kin, is happy alone and has unpleasant conduct, behavior and attendance. Confide or suspect on all be critical at all times postpone things at the time of action take up anything without examining it be submissive to his sense organs turn his unstable mind round over burden the sense organs be too much dilatory {?} Act under the emotions of anger or exhilaration live under continued grief feel exhilarated in success and depressed in failure give up courage remember his scandals offer oblation to fire (with cow ghee, barley, sesame, sacred grass and mustard) while unclean All of the above “Code of Conduct” section is from

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.24]]
Food Rules of eating Types of diet Satmya (suitability of food) Food which creates ama (un-suitable food) Wholesome foods The 8 variables of dieting Volume of food to eat Heavy vs. light foods Actions of a few ingredients Rules of eating: Details on the Rules of Eating: Food should because of this reason: be eaten: Warm stimulates Agni, digests quickly, carminates flatus, reduces mucus, Unctuous tastes good, stimulates the un-stimulated Agni, gets digested quickly, carminates flatus, develops the body, provides firmness to sense organs, increases strength, produces clarity of complexion, Proper without disturbing V,P,K , promotes life span, easily passes down to anus, Quantity doesn’t disturb Agni, gets digested without discomfort. When doshas are situated in their own locations, agni is stimulated appetite is previous meal arisen, entrance of the channels are open, eructation is pure, heart is normal, is digested flatus passes down and urges of flatus, urine and feces are attended to, the eaten food promotes only the life-span without afflicting any dhatu. (On the contrary, when eating during indigestion, the newly-eaten food mixes with the product of the previous meal and vitiates all the doshas quickly.) Items non- see antagonistic foods chart antagonistic in potency: Eat in no mental/ emotional disturbance interrupt one while eating thus. favorable place, with favorable accessories: Not eat fast no choking, no “depression” food is “established in it’s place”. Especially, this allows detecting the defects of food (incorrect for one’s body type, or being moldy); the merits of food are certain Not eat too Eating too slow, one doesn’t get satisfaction, eats too much, food is cold and slow digested irregularly Not eat while same defects as eating too fast talking /laughing /distracted this whole chart .1

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.36]]
24.9 [Types of Diet:] The factors in relation to diet will be explained further by way of definition and individual items, such as– diet is 1 from point of view of intake. Diet is of 2 types according to source: immobile (plant source) and mobile (animal source). Also of 2 types according to effect; wholesome and un-wholesome It is of 4 types according to the way of intake: drinks, eatables, chewables and lickables. It is of 6 types according to taste. It is of 20 types according to properties such as heavy-light, cold-hot, unctuous- rough, dull-sharp, stable-mobile, soft-hard, non-slimy-slimy, smooth-coarse, minute- gross and viscous-liquid. It has innumerable variations due to abundance of substances, their combinations and preparations.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.20]]
Satmya: “that which suits the self”. It is of 3 degrees: superior, inferior and medium “Satmya and Upasaya have the same meaning.” The 3 Types [Grades] of Satmya: Superior: use of all 6 rasas [tastes] collectively (in each meal) It is most suitable for the body Inferior: use of only one rasa (in each meal) It is damaging to the body over time. Medium: use of a few rasas (in each meal) It is not as good as using 6 rasas in each meal, but less damaging then use of only 1 rasa in each meal.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.20]]
The inferior and medium types of suitability be upgraded to the superior type only in graded manner. Even if one has achieved the balanced intake of all the 6 tastes in his diet, he should insist in the use of the wholesome foods [delete the rest of this sentence:] things keeping in consideration all the specific factors of the method of dieting starting from nature to the consumer (as the 8th factor).

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.24]]
Other Rules of eating: One should eat after due consideration to himself.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.8]]
Do not eat when previous meal is not digested, when stool and urine have not been passed, or when upset, not concentrating Do not eat food with antagonistic qualities: equal amounts of honey and ghee (See antagonism section later) Quality of food creating Ama: heavy, rough, cold, dry, disliked, distending, burning, unclean, antagonistic, taken untimely, and also while afflicted by emotions (passion, anger, greed, confusion, envy, bashfulness, grief, conceit, excitement and fear).

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.9]]
Food which is harmful to the channels, and which is disliked is certainly not at all desirable. -Su25-45 Even wholesome food taken improper quantity does not get digested if there is anxiety, grief, fear, anger, uncomfortable ‘bed’ [or chair/ couch], or vigil [not sleeping/ not resting].

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.23]]
Food or any other thing which is liked but is unwholesome and with unpleasant consequences should not be used by carelessness or ignorance.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.345-347]]
Making an Offering: One should offer regularly wholesome food and drinks to “antaragni”;( internal fire) with due consideration to quantity and time. One who offers oblation to an external fire as well as the food oblations to the internal fire, as well as right conduct, doesn’t get sick.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.3]]
The best foods to be taken regularly through life: rice, pulses, rock salt, fruits, barley, rain water, milk, ghee, honey. Requirements of Wholesome food: consumed properly by the Agnis, “participating in the non-stopping process of all dhatus (metabolism) like time” and which doesn’t effect the dhatu agnis, V and channels

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.45]]
The food which maintains the balanced dhatus in normalcy and restores the equilibrium in mal-balanced ones should be taken as wholesome. The other food is un- wholesome. That which is not harmful to the paths of the body and is according to liking (the patient should enjoy the food !) is called “Pathya” (wholesome). The other food is un- wholesome.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.41]]
“It is not possible to derive entire beneficial results of food only on the basis of it’s quantity because all the “8 factors of dieting” (see chart) have their “divided” [significant] effects.” In other words, it’s not just HOW MUCH you eat, but WHAT you eat. One should not eat foods out of either attachment or ignorance; rather he should eat the wholesome food after examination, because the body is a product of food.”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.3]]
Results of Wholesome Food: endows the body with development, strength, luster, and happy life, and provides energy to the body tissues

[[cite: Sutrasthana 28.5]]
Wholesome and unwholesome food produce good and bad effects respectively.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.3]]
Benefits of proper food: Food and drinks with desirable smell, taste and touch and having been taken according to prescribed method is IS SAID AS VITAL STRENGTH by the experts This was deduced on the basis of observing their results directly. The reason is because the condition of internal fire depends on food and drinks for it’s fuel. Food and drinks produce energy in mind, constitution of dhatus, strength, complexion and clarity of sense organs, if properly taken. Otherwise they become harmful.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.348]]
One taking wholesome food with controlled self lives healthy for 1036 nights (100 years) liked by the good men.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.349-350]]
Food is the vital breath of living beings and that is why people rush to the food. Complexion, cheerfulness, good voice, life, imagination, happiness, contentment, corpulence, strength, intellect– all these are dependent on food. The worldly activities done for livelihood, the vedic ones for attainment of heaven and those for emancipation also depend on food.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.21-22]]
“Oka-Satmya” (Adjustment to a Particular Diet or Behavior Due to Practice): Whatever is suitable to a particular person because of regular use and cultural custom is known as oka-satmya. 8 Variables of Dieting (factors that effect the result of the food taken in): (Vi, Ch1, vs.21 (p.305)) Prakriti/ the inherent qualities of the food ingredients. (“Swabhava”) [For example, black gram is heavy and green gram is light, or pork is (nature): heavy and deer meat is light.] Karana (processing) imparting other properties through cooking, food preparation, and pharmacy procedures “These properties are infused by contact of water, fire, cleansing, churning, place, time, infusing, steeping, etc. Also long duration, utensil, etc.” Samyoga combination of 2 or more ingredients. This exhibits peculiarities (combination) which are not seen in the individual substances. [Examples: honey+ ghee, or fish+ milk.] Rasi (quantity) divided into sarvagraha (total meal/[or total volume of food consumed per day] volume) and parigraha (volume of each individual ingredient). Desa (place) the original location where the ingredients, game, etc.of grew, the place of distribution, and suitability of the place these items are being used Kala (time) related to A: stage of disorder and B: season Upayogasamstha rules for eating (See “Details of Rules of Eating” chart, p....) Upayokta person consuming the food. Variation is due to body type and suitability developed by habit. On him depends the “Oka-satmya” -suitability developed by practice. this whole chart

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.3]]
Volume of food to eat: Fill stomach 1/3 with solid food, 1/3 with liquid food, leaving 1/3 “for the doshas” [in other words, leaving 1/3 empty space in the stomach]

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.4]]
Eat according to capacity of Agni/digestion.; Whatever quantity gets digested in time without disturbing the normalcy should be regarded as the proper measure.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.341]]
Heavy food-eat only to 1/3-1/2 the point of “saturation”. Light food-can eat up to the point of saturation.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.341]]
The “point of saturation”, in turn, depends on the strength of agni.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.6]]
Character of food taken in appropriate quantity: There is no obstruction in heart, no pain in sides, no excessive heaviness in abdomen, saturation of sense organs, cessation of hunger and thirst, ease in standing, sitting, lying down, movement, inspiration, expiration, laughing and gossiping, easy digestion in evening and morning, promotion of strength, complexion, and development.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.8]]
It definitely provides strength, complexion and happy life, without causing any health problems.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.7]]
Character of food taken in inappropriate quantity: Insufficient: causing loss of strength, complexion, and development, un- saturation, upward movement of vayu, harm to life-span, virility and immunity, damage to body, mind, intellect and sense-organs, inflicting “sara” [damaging sara -tissue essence], carrying inauspiciousness and causing 80 V disorders.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.7]]
Excessive: When one eats solid food up to the saturation point [feeling ‘full’] and then drinks “liquids up to the same” [equal portion as the solid foods], the 3 doshas which normally reside in the stomach are pressed too much by the excess quantity of food. Thus the 3 doshas get vitiated simultaneously. These vitiated doshas enter into [/mix with] the food and get located in a “portion of the belly”. From here they may cause the following symptoms: distention of the abdomen, or sudden dosha elimination via vomiting or diarrhea. V produces colic pain, hardness in belly, body-ache, dryness of mouth, fainting, giddiness, irregularity of digestion, stiffness in side, back and waist, constriction and spasm in blood vessels. P produces fever, diarrhea, internal heat, thirst, narcosis, giddiness and delirium. K produces vomiting, anorexia, indigestion, fever with cold, lassitude and heaviness in body.

[[cite: Vimanasthana 2.11-13]]
***Visusika and Alasaka (diarrhea/vomiting and constipation due to Amavisa/Ama) Described, along with trtmnt, on pg. 311-312; may be worth it to include (at least include in “Grahaniroga” Chapter).***

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.6]]
The qualities of lightness and heaviness in food articles are not inert [due merely to different mass/ density of the food articles]. In fact, light articles are predominant in properties of vayu (air element) and agni (fire element), while the heavy articles are predominant in prthivi (earth element) and soma (ap) (water element). So, by dint of their properties, these light articles are stimulant of digestion. And even when taken up to the saturation point [full stomach], they produce little derangement. On the contrary the heavy articles are dissimilar in nature to the nature of the body’s digestive fire. Thus heavy foods are not by nature stimulant of digestion. If the heavy foods are taken up to saturation point, they cause considerable derangement. There is an exception; in persons doing physical exercise and[/or] who have very strong agni (digestive fire), heavy foods taken even up to saturation point won’t cause excess derangement. So, the quantity of food per meal which will produce derangement is relative to that person’s “Agnibala” (power of digestion).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.7]]
It is not so that the article itself has no importance in this respect. In fact considering the property of the article, the intake of heavy ones is advised as 1/3 or ½ of the saturation point [till stomach is 1/3 to ½ full] [till agni, determined by observing appetite, is diminished by 1/3 to 1/2] and not excessive saturation even in case of light articles [i.e., light foods may be taken up to the saturation point, i.e, till the stomach is full] in order to maintain the proper strength of agni. **

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.343]]
Heavy Vs. Light foods: Significance of Heavy Vs. Light Food According to Person: This consideration is particularly important in case of: weak, inactive, unhealthy, delicate people, and those accustomed to comfortable living.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.344]]
This is not as important in those who are: overactive, have strong digestive power, take hard food, and have large belly.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.332-333]]
Light foods: Sali, sastika (rices), mudga (pulse), lava, kapinjala, ena, sasa, sarabha, sambara (meats), basmatti rice, green mung beans, fruit, barley, rain water, non-root vegetables, ghee, roasted grain flour, meat of desert animals, or animals born in the dessert or of active animals, light animals, or animals who eat light food, common quail, gray partridge. Meat of female and small animals. Old grains (at least 1 yr), [all old foods]. Food taken in little quantity. Salt. Predominate in Agni and Vayu. Processing: frying makes light. Stimulant of digestion. 336-338, 340-341

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.332-333]]
Heavy foods: wheat, dairy, meat of domestic, sedentary, and marshy animals, or animals born in the marshlands, or animals who eat heavy food, pig, buffalo, black gram, sesame and nut butters, sugar, . Meat of male and big animals. New grains, foods. Food taken in large quantity. Flour, sugarcane, milk, sesame, Predominate in prthvi and apa.. Not stimulant of digestion. Cause considerable derangement if taken up to saturation point. Flattened rice. Dried meat, dried vegetable, lotus tubers, ..... Cheese., fish, yogurt, 336-337, 340-341

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.9]]
Heavy Foods to Use Moderately: A person, after having taken food, should never eat heavy preparations of flour, rice and flattened rice. Even when hungry, one should take them in proper quantity.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.10-11]]
One should not take constantly dried meat, dried vegetable, lotus tubers and stem because of their heaviness. The meat of emaciated animal should not be taken. Similarly one should not take continuously kurcika and kilata (milk products), pork, beef, buffalo meat, fish, curd, black gram and yavaka.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.339]]
Processing: example: roasted grain flour (light) becomes heavy when boiled into a dumpling.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.339]]
By processing, the heavy food articles become light and vice versa. Such as vrihi (a heavy food) becomes light when transformed into lajja after frying; on the other hand, the flour of roasted grains (which is light) becomes heavy when processed into cooked bolus [dumpling].

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.334-335]]
In taking meat of animals, remember: all dhatus have heaviness in progressive order (so majja is heavier than mamsa) Heaviness of meat according to body part: Shoulder is heavier than flesh of thighs, then comes the chest and thereafter the head. Testicles, penis, pelvis, kidneys, liver and rectum-these are heavier than flesh and also the trunk and muscles attached to bones.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.5]]
Heavy-ness According to Volume Ingested: Taking very large amounts of light foods makes them heavy on digestion. Taking very small amounts of heavy foods makes them light on digestion.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 5.12]]
The Light Foods Which Are Wholesome, and To Be Taken Every Day (The Backbone of the Diet): One should take usually sastika, sali (rice), mudga (pulses), saindhava (rock salt), amalaka (fruits), barley, rain water, milk, ghee and honey.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.4]]
Actions of some common foods and tastes: By nature: water moistens, salt causes oozing, alkali helps digestion, honey unites, ghee uncts, milk vitalizes, meat promotes the bulk, meat soup nourishes, wine deteriorates, sidhu (a fermented preparation) emaciates, draksasava stimulates appetite, phanita accumulates, curd causes swelling, vegetable of tila paste [sesame paste; tahini ]causes malaise, the pulse of black gram produces abundance of internal excrement (feces), alkali damages vision and semen, sour substances is mostly P-aggravating except pomegranates and amalaki, sweet is mostly K-aggravating except honey and old sali, sastika (rice), barley, and wheat; bitter is mostly V-aggravating and non-aphrodisiac except the tip of vetra, guduci and patola leaves; pungent is mostly V-aggravating and non-aphrodisiac except long pepper and ginger. the above paragraph

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.5-7]]
Chart of Foods 1) sukadhanya (awned grains) 2) samidhanya (legumes) 3) mamsa (meat) 4) saka (vegetables) 5) phala (fruit) 6) harita (salads) 7) madya (alcoholic drinks) 8) jala (water) 9) gorasa (milk and it’s products) 10) iksu (sugarcane and it’s products) 11) krtanna (dietary preparations) 12) aharayogi (condiments) Summary of the Chart of Food’s Categories: The chart contains the following categories, in order: 1) sukadhanya (awned grains), 2) samidhanya (legumes), 3) mamsa (meat), 4) saka (vegetables), 5) phala (fruit), 6) harita (salads), 7) madya (alcoholic drinks), 8) jala (water), 9) gorasa (milk and it’s products), 10) iksu (sugarcane and it’s products), 11) krtanna (dietary preparations) and 12) aharayogi (condiments).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.8]]
Chart of Foods, by Category: Category/ Rasa Virya Vipaka Merits Demerits food: Category 1: “Sukha- dhanya” (awned grains) (What does Awned mean?)[sprou ted?][-see p.119 in my old book for definition.] types of sali sweet, sweet, have little Vata, produce rice, such as cool cool formed and LITTLE feces, rakta sali, are unctuous, bulk- mahasali, promoting, semen- kalama, promoting and DIURETIC sakunahrta, turnaka, dirghasuka, panduka, langula, sugandhaka, lohavala, sariva, pramoda, patanga, tapaniya etc. -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.9-12]]
[Rakta sali] is the best sali; it alleviates red sali thirst and all the three dosas mahasali the 2nd best kalama the 3rd best yavaka, are inferior varieties hayana, of sali which pamsuvapya, imitate (the good naisadhaka varieties of) sali etc. rice in merits and demerits.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.14]]
Sastika (rice) cold, unctuo promotes stability and sweet us, alleviates the 3 doshas. non- Gaura (white) is best of the heavy varieties of sastika. Krsnagaura (blackish- white) is 2nd. Varaka, uddalaka, cina, sarada, ujjwala, dardura, gandhara, kuruvinda are slightly inferior to sastika in properties.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.15]]
Vrihi is sweet and guru [heavy] but has amla paka and as such aggravates P. The patala variety causes abundance of urine, feces and heat and aggravates all 3 doshas.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.16]]
Syamaka is astringent-sweet, light, along with aggravates V, alleviates K koradusa and P, is cold, constipating and absorbent.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.17-18]]
Hastisyamaka, These are similar to niwara, syamaka in properties. toyaparni, gavedhuka, prasantika, ambhahsyama ka, lauhitya, anu, priyangu, mukundqa, jhinti, garmuti, varuka, varaka

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.19]]
simbira, utkata, jurna Yava (barley) sweet rough, producing abundant flatus cold, and feces, promotes NON- STABILITY, is slightly HEAV astringent, tonic, and Y, alleviates disorders of K.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.20]]
Venuyaya is rough, having astringent (barley- as subsidiary rasa, sweet, shaped seeds alleviates K and P and also of bamboo) fat, helminths and poisons, and is strength-promoting.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.21]]
Godhuma sweet, union-promoting, V- (wheat) cold alleviating, vitalizer, bulk- promoting, aphrodisiac, unctuous, stabilizer, heavy.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.309-310]]
Nandimukhi are sweat, unctuous and and madhuli cold. (types of Su27#-22 wheat) Old vs. New They should be used when Cereals and they are 1 year old. Legumes: The old ones are mostly rough. The new one is

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.23-34]]
mostly heavy. The ones who’s’ crop comes shortly is lighter. “Samidhanya” (LEGUMES): “Mudga” astrin rough, KATU alleviates K and P. green gram gent- cold, “The best among legumes (green mung sweet light, used as pulses.” bean) non- slimy “Masa” (black aphrodesiac, excellent V- gram) alleviating, unctuous, hot, sweet, heavy, strength- promoting, causing abundance of feces, gives sexual potency. “Rajamasa” is laxative, relishing, alleviates K, semen and amlapitta (acid gastritis), is sweet, V-aggravating, rough, astringent, non- slimy and heavy. Kulattha hot, astringent, amlapaka, (horse gram; alleviates K, semen, and V, looks like a is constipating and small beneficial for cough, chickpea) hiccup, dyspnoea and piles. “Makusthaka” is sweet, madhura paka, constipating, rough, cold and useful in internal hemorrhage, fever etc. Canaka Are all light, cold, sweet, Among them, (gram), slightly astringent, masura is Masura roughening, beneficial for constipating and (lentils), P and K and useful as kalaya is Khandika and pulses and pastes. exceedingly V- Harenu (pea) aggravating. Tila [sesame Unctuous, hot, sweet, seed] bitter, astringent, pungent, beneficial for skin, hair, strength, alleviates V and aggravates K and P. Various sweet, cold, heavy, legumes strength-reducing and roughening. They are fit to be taken along with some fatty substance by strong persons. Simbi is rough, astringent, aggravates V in bowels, is non-aphrodisiac, non- beneficial for eyes and digests with wind. Adhaki aggravates V and alleviates K and P. Avalguja alleviate K and V (bakuci) and cakramarda Nispava aggravates V and P the fruits of are similar in properties to kakandola and those of masa [black gram, kapikacchu listed above]. -All the chart above is from

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.310]]
Proper when dehusked and preparation of properly fried, they digest legumes: easily.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.86]]
MEATS ***2 pages No other food excels meat (P.197-198) for promoting bulk of the are missing body from the book

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.61]]
at home; please fill in this information (on Meats) [Done. It’s in the 2nd to last chptr in Blue Book.] Goat [a favorable meat:] “Category varies, not too cold, not too heavy, due to mixed habit not too unctuous, does not of the animals” vitiate dosas, because of body and does not block the channels. [This is a good example of this principle, described in

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.62]]
“srotas”/ Treatment? chapter.] Mutton sweet, cold, heavy, bulk- “Category varies, promoting. due to mixed habit of the animals”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.63-87]]
Peacock excellently beneficial for vision, hearing, intellect, agni, age, complexion, voice and life. It is tonic, alleviates V and promotes muscles and semen. Swan heavy, hot, unctuous, sweet, promotes voice, complexion, and strength, are bulk-promoting, increase semen and alleviate V. Cocks unctuous, hot, aphrodisiac, bulk-promoting, voice- awakening, tonic, excellently alleviating V and are diaphoretic Partridge heavy, hot, sweet. It’s habitat being not too arid or too marshy [this is a key; understand an animal’s (and a plants?) nature greatly by it’s habitat (and it’s habits?)], it alleviates three dosas with predominance of V. Grey because of coldness, Partridge sweetness and lightness, is beneficial for the disorders of P, K, rakta and those having mildness of V. Common astringent-sweet, light, quail stimulant of Agni, alleviates sannipata, and is katu vipaka. Godha ksaya madhur alleviates V and P, is bulk- (iguana) katu a promoting, and tonic Sallaka (?) sweet katu alleviates V, P, and K and sour removes cough and dyspnoea. Domestic astrin non- madhur alleviate internal pigeon gent slimy a hemorrhage, cold Wild pigeon cold slightl constipating and y diminishing quantity of lighter urine parrot astrin sitala ruksa- useful in phthisis, cough, constipating gent- katu wasting; light and appetizer sour Cataka sweet unctuous; promotes (sparrow) strength and semen, alleviates sannipata, particularly V. Hare astrin non- katu usefull in sannipata with gent, slimy, mild V sweet cold, rough, light Ena (black madh madhur alleviates 3 doshas, is buck) ura a wholesome, light, Pork uncting, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, alleviates fatigue and V, promotes strength, relish in food and sweating, and is heavy. Beef: useful in absolute V, chronic rhinitis, intermittent fevers, dry cough, fatigue, excess agni and wasting of muscles. Buffalo unctuous, hot, sweet, aphrodisiac, heavy, saturating. Produces firmness, bulk, courage and sleep Fishes heavy, hot, sweet, tonic, Have plenty of bulk-promoting, V- demerits. alleviating, unctuous, aphrodisiac and Rohita (a fish) Because of eating algae and grasses, and also because of avoidance of sleep, is appetizer, laghupaka (light in digestion) and strength- promoting. Tortoise useful for complexion, [How @ N. alleviates V, is aphrodisiac, American promotes vision and turtles? strength, is conducive to Snapping intellect and memory, Turtle?] wholesome and destroys phthisis. Rhinoceros is obstructing to channels, strength-promoting, sweet, uncting, bulk-promoting, beneficial for complexion, alleviates fatigue and V. EGGS: are useful in diminished of swan, semen, cough, heart disease chakora, hens, and injuries. They are peacocks, and sweet, not causing burning sparrows sensation and immediately strength-promoting. [But probably heavy.] -All the above chart from

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.312-315]]
Meat Soup, nourishing and benefits of: cordial nectar for those suffering from phthisis, during convalescence, for the emaciated, those having diminished semen and desirous of strength ad luster when prepared accordingly alleviates all diseases. Promotes voice, strength of age, intelligence, sense organs, and life. Those indulged in physical exercise

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.311]]
intercourse and wine do not fall ill or become weak if they take diet with meat soup regularly. Inappropriate Meat of animals meat for who died a natural consumption: death, are emaciated, too much fatty, old, young, killed by poisons, not maintained on pasture graze; bitten

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.35-62]]
by snakes, Group Of Meat Name (Category) Animals in this Category Characteristics and Indications for meat of animals in this category: Prasaha cow These animals are heavy, (“Animals who take their ass hot and sweet. food by snatching”) mule They promote strength and [This term possibly refers camel development. to the method of breaking panther They are aphrodisiac. up their food with their lion They alleviate V. mouths. Perhaps a closer bear They aggravate K and P. look at the sanskrit word monkey They are useful for people ‘prasaaha’ would reveal wolf who exercise regularly and more detail (on why these tiger have strong digestive particular animals have taraksu (hyena) power. been grouped together, and babhru (large brown mongoose) what their common cat therapeutic action is!). In mouse any case, this group may be fox known by what it is NOT, jackal The meat of animals and as the other groups are hawk birds of this group which easier to comprehend and vantada (dog) are carnivorous is useful distinguish.] casa (blue jay) for those suffering from crow chronic piles, grahani dosa sasaghni (golden eagle) and phthisis. madhuha (honey buzzard) bhasa (bearded vulture) vulture owl kulingaka dhumika kurara (fish eagle) Bhumisaya white kakulimrga (python) These animals are heavy, (Animals who sleep in blackish hot and sweet. burrows in the earth) kakulimrga (python) They promote strength and spotted development. kakulimrga (python) They are aphrodisiac. kurcika They alleviate V. cillata They aggravate K and P. bheka (frog) They are useful for people godha (iguana) who exercise regularly and sallaka have strong digestive gandaka power. kadali mongoose swavid (porcupine) Anupa mrga srmara (wild boar) These animals are heavy, (Animals who live in camara (yak) hot and sweet. marshy land) khadga (rhinoceros) They promote strength and buffalow development. gayal cow They are aphordesiac. elephant They alleviate V. nyanku (antelope) They aggravate K and P. hog They are useful for people ruru (deer) who exercise regularly and have strong digestive power. Varisaya tortoise These animals are heavy, (Animals who live in crab hot and sweet. waters) fish They promote strength and sisumara (estuarine crocodile) development. timingila (whale) They are aphrodesiac. pearl oyster They alleviate V. conch snail They aggravate K and P. udra (cat fish) They are useful for people kumbhira (crocodile) who exercise regularly and culuki (gangetic dolphins) have strong digestive makara (great Indian crocodile) power. etc. Ambucarin swan These animals are heavy, (Animals which move on kraunca hot and sweet. waters) balaka They promote strength and baka (common crane) development. karandava They are aphrodesiac. plava They alleviate V. sarari They aggravate K and P. puskarahva They are useful for people kesari who exercise regularly and manitundaka have strong digestive mrnalakantha power. madgu kadambu kakatundaka utkrosa pundarikaksa megharava jalakukkuti ara nandimukhi vati sumukha sahacari rohini kamakali sarasa rakta sirsaka cakravaka (and similar other birds) Jangla mrga prsat (spotted deer) These animal meats are (Animals living in forests) sarabha (wapiti) light, cold, sweet and rama slightly astringent. swadamstra They are useful for patients mrgamatrka of sannipata where P is hare aggravated predominantly, urana V is moderate and K is kuranga aggravated in the lowest gokarna degree. kottakaraka caruska harina Jangala Mrga is slightly ena superior to Vartakadi sambara Viskira group [in the above kalapucchaka function/ in all ways]. rsya varapota Lavadya Viskira lava (common quail) These animal meats are (Birds similar to common vartiraka light, cold, sweet and quail who eat while kapinjala slightly astringent. scattering the grains) cakora They are useful for patients upacakra of sannipata where P is kukkubha aggravated predominantly, raktavartma V is moderate and K is aggravated in the lowest degree. Vartakadi Viskira vartaka (male bustard) [{The text does not (Birds of the previous vartika (female bustard) mention} the category or “Lavadya Viskira” group peacock function for this group of who are also gallinaceous tittira (partridge) birds. cock But I presume it has the kanka same attributes as Jangla, sarapada Lavadya and Pratuda.] indrabha gonarda girivartaka Vartakadi Viskira group is krakara slightly inferior to Jangala avakara Mrga group [in the above varada function/ in all ways]. Pratuda Satapatra These animal meats are (Birds who eat while bhrngaraja light, cold, sweet and “striking” [pecking?]) koyasti slightly astringent. jivanjivaka They are useful for patients kairata of sannipata where P is kokila aggravated predominantly, atyuha V is moderate and K is gopaputra aggravated in the lowest priyatmaja degree. “lattaa” “latta(tu)saka” babhru vataha dindimanaka jati dundubhi pakkara lohaprstha kulingaka kapota (pigeon) suka (parrot) saranga cirati kanku yastika sarika kalvinka cataka angaracudaka parawata (dove) panda(na)vika Prasaha Bhumisaya Anupa mrga Varisaya Ambucarin Jangla mrga (“Animals (Animals who (Animals who (Animals who (Animals (Animals who take their sleep in live in marshy live in waters) which move living in food by burrows in land) on waters) forrests) snatching”) the earth) cow white srmara (wild tortoise swan prsat (spotted ass kakulimrga boar) crab kraunca deer) mule (python) camara (yak) fish balaka sarabha camel blackish khadga sisumara baka (wapiti) panther kakulimrga (rhinoceros) (estuarine (common rama lion (python) buffalow crocodile) crane) swadamstra bear spotted gayal cow timingila karandava mrgamatrka monkey kakulimrga elephant (whale) plava hare wolf (python) nyanku pearl oyster sarari urana tiger kurcika (antelope) conch snail puskarahva kuranga taraksu cillata hog udra (cat fish) kesari gokarna (hyena) bheka (frog) ruru (deer) kumbhira manitundaka kottakaraka babhru (large godha (crocodile) mrnalakantha caruska brown (iguana) culuki madgu harina mongoose) sallaka (gangetic kadambu ena cat gandaka dolphins) kakatundaka sambara mouse kadali makara (great utkrosa kalapucchaka fox mongoose Indian pundarikaksa rsya jackal swavid crocodile) megharava varapota hawk (porcupine) etc. jalakukkuti vantada (dog) ara casa (blue jay) nandimukhi crow vati sasaghni sumukha (golden eagle) sahacari madhuha rohini (honey kamakali buzzard) sarasa bhasa rakta sirsaka (bearded cakravaka vulture) (and similar vulture other birds) owl kulingaka dhumika kurara (fish eagle) Lavadya Vartakadi Pratuda Viskira Viskira (Birds who eat (Birds similar (Birds of the while to common previous “striking” quail who eat “Lavadya [pecking?]) while Viskira” scattering the group who are grains) also gallinaceous) lava (common vartaka (male Satapatra quail) bustard) bhrngaraja vartiraka vartika koyasti kapinjala (female jivanjivaka cakora bustard) kairata upacakra peacock kokila kukkubha tittira atyuha raktavartma (partridge) gopaputra cock priyatmaja kanka “lattaa” sarapada “latta(tu)saka indrabha ” gonarda babhru girivartaka vataha krakara dindimanaka avakara jati varada dundubhi pakkara lohaprstha kulingaka kapota (pigeon) suka (parrot) saranga cirati kanku yastika sarika kalvinka cataka angaracudaka parawata (dove) panda(na)vik a Note: “Goat and sheep [mutton] do not come decidedly in any of the above 8 groups because of their mixed habitat.” -This entire meat chart, above several pages

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.88]]
VEGETABLES: vegetables of alleviate all 3 doshas and patha, are constipating except kasamarda, sati, vastuka which is laxative vastuka, sunisannaka kakamaci alleviates all 3 doshas, is aphrodisiac rasayana, not too hot or too cold, purgative and anti-leprotic [reduces all skin diseases]. Rajaksavaka alleviates all 3 dosas, is light, constipating and beneficial particularly for those suffering from grahanidosa and piles. Kalasaka is pungent, appetizer, alleviates poison ands swelling, is light, hot, V- aggravating and rough. (Amla) cangeri is appetizer, usnavirya, constipating, useful in K and V, and beneficial in grahani and piles. Upodika is madhura rasa, madhura vipaka, purgative, K- aggravatign, aphrodisiac, unctuous, cold and anti- narcosis. Tanduliya is rough, anti-narcosis, anti-poison, beneficial in internal hemorrhage, madhura rasa, madhura vipaka and cold. Mandukaparni, These are bitter vegetables. tip of vetra, They alleviate K and P and kucela, are sitavirya and vanatiktaka, katuvipaka. karkotaka, bakuci, patola, sakuladani, flowers of vasa, sarngesta, kembuka, kathillaka, nadi, kalaya, gojihva, vartaka, tilaparnika, kulaka, karkasa, nimba and parpata all legumes, ma sita these vegetables are heavy, phanji, cili, dh rough, and often digest kutumbhaka, all ura with distension. Purgative. types of aluka They should be boiled, the with leaves, juice be expressed out and kuthinjara, then added with some fat flowers of sana before intake. and salmali, karbudara, suvarcala, nispava, kovidara, pattura, cuccuparnika, kumarajiva, lottaka, palankya, marisa, kalamba, nalika, asuri, kusumbha, vrkadhumaka, laksmana, cakramarda, nalinika, kutheraka, lonika, yavasaka, kusmandaka, bakuchi, yatuka, salakalyani, triparni, piluparnika The flowers of are checking and are useful sana, kovidara, particularly in internal karbudara and hemorrhage. salmali The tender astringent, checking, cold young leaves of and beneficial in P-type vata, undumbar, diarrhea aswattha, plaksa, lotus, etc. Vatsadani alleviates V gandira and alleviate K citraka sreyasi, alleviate V bilwaparni and bilwa (leaves) bhandi, satavari these alleviate V and P (leaves), bala, jivanti, parvani and parvapuspi Vegetable of are light, purgative and Langalika and bitter eranda ([castor]) vegetables of are V-aggravating, tila, vetasa and pungent-bitter-sour, and eranda purgative. The vegetable of is rough, sour, hot, kusumbha alleviates K and aggravates P Trapusa and are sweet, heavy, ervaruka distending, cold, relishing and rough. Trapusa is excessively diuretic. Fully ripe (fruit alleviates burning of) ervaruka sensation, thirst, exhaustion and uneasiness. Alabu is purgative, rough, cold and heavy cirbhata and are also useful for ervararuka purgation the ripe (fruit of) kusmanda is alkaline, sweet, sour, light, diuretic, laxative and alleviates all dosas. -all the above chart is from

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.114-124]]
Keluta, kadamba, are non-slimy, heavy, cold nandimasaka and and channel-blocking ainduka (Various types are astringent and useful in of) utpala internal hemorrhage. Talapralamba alleviates wound and pain (tender top in chest. portion of tala stem) Kharjura [date] is useful in internal and fruit of tala hemorrhage and wasting taruta, lotus these are heavy, distending stem, lotus root, and cold krauncadana, kaseruka, srngataka and ankalodya stalks of kumuda are cold, sweet, astringent and utpala (water and Aggravate K and V. lily), along with flowers and fruits of water lily Seed of Lotus ma madhur astringent, slightly dh a distending, alleviate ura internal hemorrhage munjataka is strength-promoting, cold, heavy, unctuous, saturating, bulk-promoting, alleviates V and P, is madhura and aphrodisiac. Vidarikanda is vitalizer, bulk- promoting, aphrodisiac, beneficial fro throat and is rasayana, strength- promoting, diuretic, sweet and cold. The tuber of amlika is beneficial in grahani (roga) and piles, is laghu, not very hot, alleviates V- P, is constipating and useful in alcoholism. Vegetable of aggravates 3 doshas, is mustard constipating and antidiuretic vetegable of has similar action as ratkanala vegetable of mustard, and is particularly rough and sour. Pindaluka is also similar to vegetable of mustard, and relishing because of being tuber. various are cold, causing rhinitis, Mushrooms sweet, and heavy except sarpacchatraka (a type of mushrooom) All the above is -all the above chart the 4th group

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.316]]
vegetables- It is mainly concerned with leaves, tubers and fruits. Vegetables unfit aflicted by insects, to eat: wind, sun; dried, old, UNSEASONAL, NOT COOKED WITH FAT, and “unfiltered” ([meaning not cleaned; picked through for

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.125-165]]
debris?]). FRUITS: Grapes alleviates thirst, burning sensation, fever, dyspnoea, internal haemorrhage, wound, wasting, vata-pitta, udavarta, hoarseness of voice, alcoholism, bitterness in mouth, dryness of mouth and cough because of being bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, sweet, unctuous and cold. Kharjura [dates] is sweet, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, heavy and cold; and is useful in wasting, injury, burning sensation and V-P disorders. Parusaka and are recommended for V madhuka and P. [[licorice root??] Amrata is sweet, bulk-promoting, tonic, saturating, heavy, slightly unctuous, K- aggravating, cold, aphrodisiac and digests with distension. The ripe fruits of are bulk-promoting, tala and unctuous, cold, tonic, and narikela sweet (Coconut) bhavya is sweet, sour, astringent, distending, heavy, cold, aggravating P and K, constipating and mouth- cleaning sour (fruits of) aggravate P and K. parusaka, grapes, jujube, aruka, small jujube and nikuca Paravata It is of 2 types: 1) cold, sweet type and- 2) hot, sour type It [both types] is heavy and alleviates anorexia and increases agni. Kasmarya fruit has only slight difference from bhavya. The sour tuda has only slight difference in qualities from parusaka. Tanka is astringent-sweet, V- aggravating, heavy and cold. Kapittha, when is harmful for throat, anti- un-ripe poison, constipating and V-aggravating. Kapittha, when due to sweet, sour, ripe astringent taste and fragrance produces relish, alleviates dosas, is anti- poison, constipating and heavy. Bilwa, when ripe is digested with difficulty, causes dosas and flatus with foul smell. Bilwa, when is unctuous, hot, sharp, young [un-ripe] appetizer and alleviates K and V. Amra (Mango) Young fruits: Cause internal hemorrhage Amra (Mango) Aggravate P Mature fruits: [overly ripe/ spoiled] Amra (Mango) alleviate V and promote Ripe fruits: muscles, semen and strength the fruits of are predominantly jambu astringent-sweet, heavy, distending, cold, alleviate K-P, are constipating and aggravate V. jujube sweet, unctuous, purgative, alleviates V and P. When dried alleviates K and V and yet does not conflict with P. Simbitika phala is astringent-sweet, cold and constipating. Fruits of are sweet, slightly gangeruki, astringent, cold and karira, bimbi, alleviate P and K. todana and dhanwana Fully ripe fruits are sweet, slightly of panasa, moca astringent, unctuous, cold and rajadana and heavy. Lavali fruit is relishing due to astringent taste, non- sliminess and fragrance, used as avadamsa (in spicy preparations), is cordial and aggravates V. Nipa, satahvaka, these alleviate all 3 dosas pilu, ketaki, and poison. vikankata and pracinamalaka The fruit of is bitter-sweet, unctuous, ingudi hot and alleviates K and V. Tinduka alleviates K and P and is astringent, sweet and light. Amalaka has all the rasas except lavana. It is rough, sweet, astringent, sour and excellent alleviator of K and P. Bibbhitaka removes disorders produced in rasa, rakta, mamsa and medas, and alleviates hoarseness of voice, excessive secretion of sputum, and P disorders. Dadima Type 1: (Pomegranites) sour and astringent-sweet (this one is the best type), alleviates V, is ant- diarrhoeal, appetiser, unctuous, hot, cordial, and non-conflicting with K and P. Type 2: There is a variety which is only sour and rough; it aggravates P and V. Type 3: The variety which is only sweet alleviates P. Vrksamla anti-diarrhoeal, rough, hot, useful for V and K. Ripe fruit of same properties as Tamarind Vrksamla, but slightly less. Amlavetasa has also the same properties [as above] but is mass-breaking and is useful in colics, anorexia, constipation, mild digestion, alcoholic complications, hiccup, dyspnea, cough, vomiting, disorders of stool and in all diseases caused by V and K. The kesara is light (stamen-like parts) of matulunga the other parts are heavy of matulunga karcura, devoid is relishing, appetizer, of skin cordial, aromatic, alleviates K and V and is useful in dyspnea, hiccup and piles. Nagarnga sweet, sourish, cordial, (orange) relishing, digested with difficulty, alleviates V and is heavy vatama, are heavy, hot, unctuous, abhisuka, sweet, tonic, V-alleviating, aksota, bulk-promoting, mukulaka, aphrodisiac and aggravate nikocaka K and P alongwith urumana Priyala is similar to them in properties except hotness fruit of aggravates K, is sweet, slesmataka cold and heavy ankola fruit aggravates k, is heavy, distending and diminishes agni sami fruit is heavy, hot, sweet, rough and destroys hairs karanja fruit produces wind and is non- conflicting to V and K sour amrataka, cause internal dantasatha, hemorrhage karamardaka, and airavata vartaka (fruit of allevia vartaki) tes V, is appetiz er, punge nt and bitter parpataki fruit aggravates V and allevieates K and P aksiki fruit alleviates P and K, is sour and aggravates V anupaki fruits are sweet, amlavipaka and alleviate P and K. The fruits of are astringent-sweet, sour, aswattha, aggravate V and are udumbara, heavy. plaksa and nyagrodha The stone (drupe) of bhallataka is (vesicant) like fire but mamsa (the edible portion) is sweet and cold. – Thus the 5th -all the above chart group- fruits

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.317]]
which are commonly used. Fruits unfit to old, unripe, eat: damaged by insects, animals, snow, sun; grown in unnatural place

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.166-177]]
and time, rotted. “GROUP OF SALADS” fresh ginger relishing, appetizer, aphrodisiac. It’s juice is prescribed in V, K, and constipation. Jambira is relishing, appetizer, irritant, aromatic, mouth- cleanser, alleviates K and V, is anthelmintic and digestive. Radish * when young, alleviates the 3 doshas; but when old aggravates all 3 doshas. If fried in fat it alleviates V. If in dried condition it alleviates K and V. Surasa destroys hiccup, cough, poison, dyspnea and chest pain, aggravates P, alleviates K and V, and removes foul smell. Yavani, arjaka, these are cordial, pleasing sigru, saleya and and aggravate P. mrstaka Gandira, are irritant, hot, pungent, Jalapippali, rough, alleviate K and V. tumburu and srngaverika Bhustrna destroys sexual potency, is pungent, rough, hot and mouth-cleansing. Kharahva alleviates K and V and relieves of the diseases and discomfort of urinary bladder. Dhanyaka are relishing, aromatic, [(coriander?], not very pungent and ajagandha and irritate the doshas. sumukha Crnjanaka is constipating, irritant, beneficial for V, K and piles and is prescribed in fomentation and diet for those having no aggravated P. Palandu (Onion) aggravates K, alleviates V and NOT P [it does not alleviate P], is useful in diet, strength-promoting, heavy, aphrodisiac and relishing. Lasuna (Garlic) alleviates worms, leprosy, leucoderma, V and gulma. Is unctuous, hot, aphrodisiac, pungent, and heavy. Note: all these alleviate K and V. (“Salads” group) and their fruits, when they are in dried form “Thus ends the -all of the above chart 6th group- of

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.318]]
green plants used as salads. Instructions for are according to the salads: respective items except

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.194]]
cooking. FERMENTED LIQUORS: wine Is exhilarating

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.193]]
(in general) nourishing, removes fear, grief and fatigue, provides boldness, energy, imagination, satisfaction, corpulence and strength. It is like nectar if used by persons predominant in Sattva, according to the rules and with reasoning. Fresh (new) is mostly heavy and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.193]]
wine aggravates dosas Old wine cleanses channels, is

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.178-195]]
appetizer, light and relishing Sura beneficial for those who are emaciated, suffering from obstruction in urine, grahani and piles, alleviates V an is useful in deficiency of lactation and anemia. Madira is useful in hiccup, dyspnea, coryza, cough, obstruction in feces, vomiting, hardness of bowels, constipation and alleviates V. Jagala is beneficial in colic, dysentery, wind formation, k-V and piles. It is constipating, rough and hot, alleviates swelling and is digestive. Arista alleviates phthisis, piles, grahanidosa, anaemia, anorexia, fever, kaphaja disorders, and is relishing and appetizer Sarkara is palatable, producing easy intoxication, fragrant, alleviates disorders of urinary bladder, is digestive, cordial and improves complexion. Pakvarasa is relishing, appetizer, cordial, beneficial in phthisis, swelling and piles, alleviates disorders of fat and K and improves complexion. Sitarasika is digestive, alleviates constipation, cleanses voice and complexion, is emaciating and beneficial in swelling, abdominal disorders and piles. Gauda eliminates feces and flatus, and is saturating and appetizer. Aksiki is useful in anemia and wounds, and is appetizer. Surasava is strongly intoxicating, alleviates V and is palatable. Madhvasava is expectorant and sharp. Maireya is sweet and heavy the asava of is cordial, rough, mrdwika relishing, appetizer, (grapes) and similar to madhvika, but iksu (sugarcane not very hot. juice) combined and fermented with dhataki flowers The sura along is rough, hot and with manda aggravates V and P. (upper clear portion) prepared of barley Madhulika is heavy, digests with distension and aggravates K. Sauviraka and are appetizers, digestive, tusodaka alleviate disorders of heart, anemia and helminthiasis, are beneficial in grahani and piles and are mass- breaking. Sour Vinegar ALLEVIATES BURNING SENSATION AND FEVER BY EXTERNAL APPLICATION, AN D v AND k BY INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION. It relieves constipation, propels excrement downward and is appetizer. “Thus the 7th -all the above chart group relating to

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.48-50]]
fermented liquors is described. Insert a section here: “Asavas:” from pgs

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.196]]
173-175 (write out in chart form) WATER: General Entire water is only one Description of which falls down as rain all water: from the sky. [All types of water, wherever they are found over the world, share one fact; they have all originated from the sky and fallen down to the earth as rain.] That while falling or having fallen down depend on place and time. -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.197]]
Water while falling down from the sky, and coming in contact with the moon, the air and the sun which follow time, gets impregnated with the properties of cold, hot, unctuous, non-unctuous etc. [the 20 qualities] and so when it rests on the ground.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.198-208]]
rain water the rain water has by nature these 6 qualities: cold, pure, wholesome, palatable, clean and light. Water when depends for it’s properties fallen on the on the containing soil. earth Water fallen on it is astringent the earth in white soil water fallen on is bitter the earth in pale soil water fallen on is alkaline the earth in brown soil water fallen on is saline the earth in usara soil water fallen on is pungent the earth in hilly area water fallen on is sweet the earth in black soil These [the above 6] are the 6 properties of the water positioned on earth. The water has un-manifested rasa derived from (taste). rain, hailstone and snow The water which It is said as “Aindra” falls from the (dropped by Indra) by the sky, dropped by wise. Indra, and It is the principle water received in drinkable for the kings. prescribed containers Best water is slightly astringent-sweet, [it’s characters:] thin, non-slimy, light, non- rough and non-blocking of channels. Fresh rain water is heavy, blocking of of the rainy channels and sweet. season Fresh rain water is thin, light, non-blocking of autumn of channels. This should be used by the delicate persons using unctuous and too much food in preparing various types of diet such as eatables, chewable, lickable and drinkable. The fresh rain is unctuous, aphrodisiac, water of strength-promoting and hemanta (early heavy. winter) Fresh rain water is lighter and alleviates K in sisira (late and V. winter) Fresh rain water is astringent, sweet and of vasanta rough. (spring season) Fresh rain water is non-blocking for in summer channels. -thus the properties of water according to seasons is described decidedly. The water undoubtedly causes harm. dropped by clouds [rain- water] in perverted seasons The kings, the kingly and the delicate persons should use particularly the water -all of the above well collected in the chart autumn season.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.209-212]]
The rivers are wholesome and originating from virtuous. Himalayas and constantly used by the sages, and having water obstructed, agitated and beaten The rivers have clean water which is originating from like nectar. Malaya, carrying stones and sand The rivers have clean water and are flowing towards wholesome west The rivers are mostly mild flowing joining the and heavy. eastern sea [flowing east] The rivers cause head diseases, heart originating from disease, leprosy and Pariyatra, filaria. -all the above Vindhya and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.213-216]]
Sahya the rivers having aggravate all the dosas. water polluted with soil and feces, insects, snakes and rats, and carrying rain water Water contained Merits and demerits of in oblong ponds, water from these sources well[,] tank, may be determined on the spring, lake and basis of whether they are streams situated in marshy, hilly or arid regions. [arid {and} hilly are ideal] Water which is is not wholesome slimy, having insects, putrefied, full of leaves, moss and mud, having abnormal color and taste, viscous and foul-smelling The saline water has fishy smell and of the sea aggravates dosas. -“thus the 8 groups of -all the above chart water are described with

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.217-224]]
certainty.” MILK + MILK PRODUCTS cow’s milk has these 10 properties: sweet, cold, soft, unctuous, viscous, smooth, slimy, heavy, dull and clear. Thus it increases ojas having the same properties due to similarity [to Ojas]. Hence (cow) milk has been said as the best one among vitalizers and as rasayana. Buffalo milk is heavier and colder than that of cow. Because of plenty of fat it is useful for the person suffering from sleeplessness and excessive digestive power. Camel milk is rough, hot, slightly saline, light, and is prescribed for V, K, hardness in bowels, worms, swelling, abdominal disorders and piles. Milk of one- promotes strength, hoofed animals stability, is hot, slightly (such as mare, sour, saline, rough, light ass, etc.) and alleviates V in extremities. Goat milk is astringent-sweet, cold, constipating, light, alleviates internal hemorrhage, diarrhea, wasting, cough and fever. Sheep milk produces hiccup and dyspnea, is hot and aggravates P and K. Elephant milk promotes strength, is heavy and good stabilizer. Human milk is vitalizer, bulk- promoting, suitable, uncting and is used as snuff in internal -all the above chart hemorrhage and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.225-227]]
saturating in pain in eyes. Curd is relishing, appetizer, aphrodisiac, uncting, strength-promoting, amla- paka, hot, alleviates V, is auspicious and bulk- promoting. It is useful in rhinitis, diarrhea, shivering, intermittent fever, anorexia, dysuria and emaciation. Curd is generally discarded in autumn, summer and spring. It is also harmful -all the above chart in the disorders caused by

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.228]]
rakta, P and K. Mandaka (in vitiates all 3 doshas. which the curdling process is slow and the product is imperfect) curd The perfect curd alleviates V the supernatant promotes semen fatty layer [of curd] Curd water alleviates K and V and -all the above chart [lassi/ cleanses the channels.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.229]]
buttermilk][No! Buttermilk is listed right below; it is a different substance than “curd water”] Takra is used in swelling, piles

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.230]]
(buttermilk) grahani dosa, obstruction [milk whey??] in urine, abdominal disease, anorexia, snehavyapad (hyperlipidemia), paleness and poisons. fresh butter is constipative, appetizer

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.231-233]]
and cordial. It alleviates grahani roga, piles, facial paralysis and anorexia. (cow) Ghee promotes memory, intelligence, agni, semen, ojas, K and medas. It alleviates V, P, poison, insanity,k phthisis, inauspiciousness and fever. It is the best of all fats, is cold, madhura rasa, madhura vipaka, has 1000 potentialities and so, is used properly according to prescribed methods, exerts 1000 types of action. Old (cow) ghee alleviates intoxication [alcoholic/ other], epilepsy, fainting, phthisis, insanity, poison, fever and pain in female genital tract, ear and head. Ghees of goat, may be known in -all above sheep and properties like their milk.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.234-236]]
buffalo The products of all these are beneficial for milk like those having increased “Piyusa” appetite and sleeplessness. (colostrum), They are heavy, “Morata” (milk saturating, aphrodisiac, in 2nd and 3rd bulk-promoting and V- weeks after alleviating. delivery), various types of “Kilata” (insipissated milk) Takrapindaka is non-slimy, heavy, rough (solid portion of and constipating. buttermilk) “Thus the 9th group of -all the above milk and milk-products is

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.237]]
described.” SUGARS (AND HONEY): the juice of is aphrodisiac, cold, sugarcane laxative, unctuous, bulk- promoting and sweet. The juice of aggravates K chewed sugarcane the juice of produces burning (with sugarcane acidity). extracted by pressing machine The Paundraka due to coldness, clearness variety of and sweetness, it is sugarcane superior to vamsaka Vamsaka is inferior to paundraka -all the above

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.238-242]]
Jaggery and produce plenty of worms, minor jaggery marrow, blood, fat and muscle. The cane juice is heavy in the preceding remaining 1/4, order. 1/3 and ½ in the [The more cane juice is process of boiled down, the heavier it boiling becomes.] Guda “Guda” is the cleaned portion having little ‘mala’ matsyandika (molasses). Thereafter, by gradual elimination of mala, “matsyandika” khanda (semi-solid treacle), “khanda” (yellowish sugar) and “sarkara” sarkara (white sugar) emerge. Coldness appears in them gradually as their mala is eliminated. The sugar is aphrodisiac, beneficial obtained from for the wounded and is jaggery ucntuous. The sugar is astringent-sweet, cold obtained from and slightly bitter. yasa The honey-sugar is rough, anti-emetic, anti- diarrheal, and expectorant. All sugars are useful in thirst, -all the above internal hemorrhage and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.243-246]]
burning sensation. Honey Honey is of 4 types: 1) Maksika (derived from maksika) 2) Bhramara (derived from bhramara) 3) ksaudra (derived from ksudra), and 4) pauttika (derived from pauttika). Honey All honey aggravates V, is heavy, cold, alleviates disorders of rakta, P and K; is union-promoting, expectorant, rough, astringent, and sweet. Note: Honey, if heated, or taken by a person suffering from heat becomes fatal due to it’s association with poisons. Note: honey is useful in small quantity due to it’s properties- heavy, rough, astringent and cold. Maksika type of is the best of the 4 types of honey honey. It has oil-like color. Brhamara type is the heaviest of the 4 of honey types of honey. It is white in color. Pauttika type of is of ghee-like color. honey Ksaudra type of is brownish -all of the above honey chart

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.247-248]]
Further caution There is nothing so severe about as “madhvama” (ama “Madhvama” caused by honey) as, (ama caused by because of it’s conflicting honey) treatment, it immediately kills the person like poison. In ama, hot measures are

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.249]]
generally prescribed but in madhvama it becomes conflicting. Hence it is very severe and kills immediately like poison. Honey, [in Honey is the best general]. potentiating agent [for herbal formulas/ herbal administration] because of its derivation from various substances. “Thus the 10th group -April 5

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.250-256]]
containing mostly the 2002 sugarcane products is described.” DIETARY PREPARATION S: Peya (liquid alleviates hunger, thirst, gruel) malaise, debility, bowel disorders and fever. It is diaphoretic, appetizer, carminative, and laxative. Vilepika (Paste- is saturating, constipating, like gruel) light and cordial Manda (gruel is appetizer, carminative, water) softening for channels and diaphoretic. It supports strength due to appetizing property and lightness, in persons subjected to reducing therapy and purgation and also in those having thirst after the fat is digested [(is this referring to body fat, or fat eaten with food?)]. Liquid Gruel removes fatigue of the prepared of fried person whose voice is paddy feeble. Gruel water pacifies thirst and prepared of fried diarrhea, produces paddy homeostasis, is wholesome, appetizer and alleviates burning sensation and fainting. It is, in well-processed form, prescribed for those having slow and irregular digestion, in children, the old and women, and the delicate ones. This gruel water added with sour pomegranates and boiled with long pepper and ginger alleviates hunger and thirst, is beneficial for channels and eliminates excreta in evacuated persons. Flour of fried is astringent-sweet, cold, -all the above paddy and light

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.257-259]]
Dana (boiled prepared of well-cleaned Odana prepared of rice) grains, devoid of water, uncleaned grains, well-cooked and warm is not well-filtered, light. IN conditions of not well-cooked poisoning and K disorders, and cold is heavy. odana is prepared of fried Types of odana rice. prepared with Types of odana prepared meat, vegetable fat, with meat, vegetable fat, oil, ghee, marrow oil, ghee, marrow and and fruits are fruits are strength- strengthening promoting, saturating, cordial, heavy ad bulk- promoting. Similar in properties are those cooked with black gram, -all the above sesame, milk and green

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.260-261]]
gram. Kulmasa (boiled is heavy, rough, V- and spiced aggravating , and grains) purgative. The physician should determine the degree of heaviness of the particular grain he is

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.262]]
using, i.e. legumes, wheat and barley. “In unspiced and spiced

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.263-264]]
vegetable soups, mildly spiced and heavily spiced meat soup, and soured and un-soured pulses, the heaviness increases in progressive order.” Lightest: Lig Light: Heavy: Heavier: hte Heaviest: r: unspiced veg. spi mildly- heavily- soured pulses unsoured pulses Soup ced spiced spiced veg meat meat . soups soups So up [So, spicing makes these foods heavier, and souring makes these foods lighter. And meat soup is lighter than “pulses” {cooked beans}.] flour of roasted produces abundant feces, But it aggravates grains is carminative. Taken in V, and is rough liquid form, it SATURATES THE PERSON IMMEDIATELY, and provides strength quickly. Flour of roasted sweet, light, cold, grains prepared constipating, alleviates of sali rice internal hemorrhage, -all the above thirst, vomiting and fever.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.265-267]]
Apupa, yavaka removes diseases such as and vatya made udavarta, coryza, cough, of barley prameha, and throat disorders. Dhana (fried are mostly reducing grains) because of dryness, saturating, and digest with difficulty due to their distending nature. Germinated are heavy; grains [sprouted grains], fried grains, saskuli, madhukroda, pindaka, pupa, pupalika etc. preparations of are heaviest (rice) flour [prepared in one of the manner described in the -all the above list of food

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.268-270]]
preparations in the above row] preparations aphrodisiac, strength- processed with promoting, heavy, and fruits, meat, fat, bulk-promoting. vegetable, sesame paste, and honey Vesavara heavy, unctuous, promotes strength and developement. Pupa prepared heavy, saturating, with milk and aphrodisiac. sugarcane juice Edibles prepared aphrodisiac, strength- -all the above with jaggery, promoting, and

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.271-272]]
sesame, milk, exceedingly heavy. honey, + sugar Various edibles heavy, saturating, prepared of aphrodisiac and cordials wheat with addition of fat or cooked in fat Edibles prepared light because of of wheat and it’s processing. “Their flour such as properties may be -all the above fried grains, indicated accordingly”

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.273]]
parpata, pupa, etc. Prthuka heavy, health promoting. (flattened rice) Should be eaten in little amount. Yava (a if taken with some soup is if not taken with preparation of purgative soup, it digests with barley) distention -all the above

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.274]]
preparations of should be taken in small aggravates V due to legumes quantity after adding with rough and cold pungent spices, fat and -all the above salt.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.275]]
edibles which nourishing and strength- heavy if mildly are bulky and promoting if over-cooked cooked hard [for [cooked till very soft] -all the above example, sweet

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.276]]
potato] -Heaviness or lightness of edibles should be decided after knowing the main ingredient, combination of other ingredients, processing and quantity of different ingredients.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.277]]
Vimardaka heavy, cordial, prepared of aphrodisiac, suitable for various the strong. -all the above substances- ripe

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.278]]
unripe, moistened and fried Rasala bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, unctuous, strength-promoting, relishing. Curd added with unctuous, saturating, -all the above jaggery cordial, alleviates V.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.279-283]]
Panaka (syrups) heavy, distending prepared of grapes, dates and jujube Syrups of heavy and distending parusaka, honey and sugarcane products Properties and actions of these syrups should be defined by knowing the combination of pungent and sour substances and the ingredients, with their quantity separately. Various types of pungent, sour, sweet, salty, Raga and light, palatable, cordial, Sadava appetizer, relishing. Leha (lickable bulk-promoting, tonic, paste) of amra relishing, saturating, and amalaka owing to unctuousness, sweetness and heaviness Properties and actions of lehas should be determined on the basis of combination, processing -all the above and quantity of

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.284-285]]
ingredients. Sukta (type of carminative irritates, rakta, vinegar) pitta and kapha the properties of fermented beverage should be d3etermined on the basis of it’s ingredients such as tubers, roots, fruits etc. Sindaki (a type relishing, light of fermented sour beverage) -all the above

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.286-294]]
THE GROUP OF ADJUVENTS OF FOODS Sesame oil sweet with subsidiary astringent taste, penetrating, hot, readily absorbed, aggravates P and K, constipating, anti- diuretic, the best among V- [-In other words; alleviating, strength- sesame oil is promoting, beneficial for versatile; it can be skin, promoting intellect combined with and appetite. Destroys all drugs according to diseases due to any condition to combination (of drugs) treat that and processing. In early condition.] times, kings of demons, by use of oil, became free from old age, diseases and fatigue, with great strength in battle. Castor oil sweet, heavy, K- [yes, C. oil has aggravating, relieves been included in vatarakta, gulma, heart ‘adjuvents of disease, and chronic fever foods’.] Mustard oil pungent, hot, affects Rakta and P, diminishes K, semen and V; alleviates itching and urticarial patches Priyala oil sweet, heavy, aggravates K but because of excessive hotness is not recommended in combination of V and P. Linseed oil sweet-sour, katu-vipak, [also known as usna-virya. Useful in V Flax Oil] but vitiates rakta and P. Kusumbha oil hot, katuvipaka, heavy oil of other the properties of these fruits and seeds other oils should be known -all the above by the nature of those S

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.295]]
fruits. Marrow and fat sweet, bulk-promoting, -all the above aphrodisiac, tonic.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.296-304]]
Coldness or hotness depends on source animal Dry ginger slightly unctuous, appetizer, aphrodisiac, hot, alleviates V and K, is Madhura-vipaka, cordial and relishing Green Long increases K, is sweet, Peppers heavy, unctuous. Dried Long alleviates K and V, is Pepper pungent, hot, aphrodisiac Black Pepper not very hot, non- aphrodisiac, light, relishing, appetizer, alleviates K and V due to it’s extracting and absorbing characters Hingu alleviates V, K and (asafoetida) constipation, is pungent, hot, appetizer, light, intestinal antispasmodic, digestive, relishing. Saindhava (rock the best among salts, salt) relishing, appetizer, aphrodisiac, vision- promoting, not causing burning sensation, ALLEVIATES TRIDOSHA, is slightly sweet. Sauvarchala salt due to it’s penetrating, hot, light and aromatic properties, is relishing, laxative, cordial and normalizes eructation Bida salt owing to sharp, hot, and quick absorption it is: appetizer, relieves colic, expels wind both upwards and downwards Aubhida salt slightly pungent-bitter and alkaline, sharp and irritant Kala (black)salt has all properties of sauvarcala salt except smell. Samudra salt is slightly sweet Pamsuja salt slightly bitter All Salts: relishing, digestive, -all the above laxative, and alleviate V.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.305-306]]
Yavasuka relieves heart disease, [Normally anemia, grahaniroga, ‘Yavaksara’] spleen enlargement, (alkali from hardness in bowels, throat awns of barley) troubles, cough caused by K, and piles. Dictionary Def. of ‘awn’: -one of the slender bristles [(a sprout?)] that terminate the glumes of the spikelet in some cereal and other grasses. -a small pointed process. ALL ALKALI sharp, hot, rough, -all the above moistening, digestive

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.307]]
rupturing, burning, appetizer, cutting and like fire. Karavi, Kuncika, these are relishing, -all the above Ajaji, Yavani, appetizer, alleviate V, K

[[cite: Vimanasthana 1.14]]
Dhanya, and foul smell. Tumburu Prthuka heavy and health- (flattened rice) promoting; it should be taken in little quantity Oil possesses the properties of unctuousness, hotness and heaviness and as such overcomes V by regular use. V possesses roughness, coldness and lightness and as such is contrary in properties. When the contraries meet together the stronger one subdues the weaker one, hence oil overcomes V by regular use. In the same way, ghee overcomes P due to sweetness, coldness and dullness because P is non-sweet, hot and sharp. Honey overcomes K due to roughness, sharpness and astringency because K is unctuous, dull and sweet. Any other substance which is contrary in properties to V, P and K overcome them by regular use.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.325]]
Afterdrinks, Antagonistic Foods, etc. After-drinks; properties Best and least wholesome foods Antagonistic foods List of antagonistic food combinations Other forms of antagonistic diet Actions and properties of after-drink: saturates, nourishes, provides energy, increases bulk of the body, brings about completion, settles down the food taken, breaks down the food mass, produces softness, moistens, digests, and helps in easy transformation and quick absorption of food. -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.326]]
Intake of wholesome after-drink saturates the person and digests the food easily for promotion of life and strength.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.319]]
Desired Qualities of an After-drink: The after-drinks should be contrary to properties of food ([the meal, which has just been eaten, and which the after-drink follows]), but non-contrary to the properties of the Dhatus.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.48-50]]
[I.e., so if the meal was chicken, gravy and potatoes, have and after-drink of wine, or honey-water or hot water. If the meal was tabouleh and broccoli, have an afterdrink of meat soup, or milk, or some sweet-unctuous drink.] AFTERDRINKS: For this condition: Use this After-Drink: Vata unctuous, hot Pitta sweet, cold Kapha rough, hot wasting meat soup those exhausted by fasting, travelling of foot, after drink of milk is wholesome as nectar speech, intercourse, wind, the sun and evacuative measures lean and thin, to produce corpulence wine [Use this: 84 Asavas (wines) Condition: “as listed in " (See wines in ‘food

[[cite: Sutrasthana 27.319-324]]
chart’)”’ reducing obese persons honey-water for weak voice (see the chapter on throat oil conditions) mild appetite, loss of sleep due to drowsiness wine , anxiety, fear and exhaustion, particularly those who are accustomed to wine and meat Note: for those afflicted with V in upper part should NOT take water after meals, because: of body, suffering from hiccup, dyspnoea and it , staying in the throat and chest, REMOVES cough; indulged in singing, speech and THE UNCTION OF THE FOOD and recital; injured to the chest produces further disorders. this chart above

[[cite: Sutrasthana 25.38-39]]
327-328 So, Summary: 1) The after-drink should balance out the qualities of the meal, and not aggravate the dhatus or an existing state of imbalance. 2) The after-drink also does extra job of helping digestion of the meal. Best and Least Wholesome Foods: Category: Worst of: Best of;: awned cereals yavaka (barley?) sali rice (like basmatti rice) legumes black gram green gram water river water during rainy season rain water salt usara rock salt pot-herbs mustard jivanti animal meats beef antelope birdmeat young dove common quail meat of animals living in frog “inguana” holes fish cilacima rohita ghees sheep-ghee cow-ghee milk sheep-milk cow milk vegetable oils sesame oil fats of marshy animals kusumbha lard [[fat of pig]] fish fats kumbhira fat of culuki fats of aquatic animals kakamadgu fat of pakahamsa [swan]] fats of gallinaceous sparrow fat of cock birds fats of plant-eating elephant fat of goat animals tubers aluka ginger fruits likuca grapes products of sugarcane Phanita sugar this chart

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.81]]
3 substances to not use excessively: pippali, alkali, and salt (see Drugs section at end of book for detail on these) Antagonistic foods: Definition of Antagonism of Foods: The substances which are contrary to “deha-dhatus” [the body tissues] behave with “virodha” (antagonism) to them [the tissues]. This antagonism may be in terms of [due to] properties of the substances themselves, combination, processing, place, time, dose etc. or natural composition.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.82]]
For An Example of Antagonism of Foods: One should not take fish with milk. Combination of both of them is madhura (rasa); madhura vipaka, “mahabhisyandi” (great obstructer for the channels), because milk has sita (cold) virya and fish has usna (hot) virya the result is “viruddhavirya” (antagonistic in terms of virya), due to conflicting viryas; it vitiates blood and due to being mahabhisyandi, creates obstruction in channels.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.102-103]]
Results of taking antagonistic foods: impotency, blindness, erysipelas, ascites, pustules, insanity, fistula-in- ano, fainting, narcosis, tympanitis, spasm in throat, anaemia, ama visa, leucoderma, leprosy, grahaniroga, oedema, acid gastritis, fever, rhinitis, genetic disorders and even death.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.104]]
Measures to counteract disorders caused by antagonistic foods: Emesis, purgation, , use of antidotes for pacification, and prior conditioning of the body with similar substances.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.105-106]]
Purgation, emesis, pacification or prior use of wholesome substances alleviates the disorders caused by antagonistic food. Antagonism becomes inert due to: suitability, small quantity, strong digestive power, in young age, in persons [already] having: unction, physical exercise, and strength.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.82]]
ANTAGONISTIC FOODS: Do not eat this: With these: Because of: milk fish Great obstruction of channels Contradictory Virya causes vitiation of blood.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.83]]
[Insert the entire sutra here.] Milk Cilacima fish He undoubtedly becomes (for a description of this fish, see victim of one of the disorders ) of blood or constipation or

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.83]]
death.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.61]]
Meat of domestic/ honey, sesamum, jaggery, milk black Causes deafness, blindness, marshy/ aquatic gram, radish (western radish?), lotus tremors, coldness, indistinct animals stalk, germinated grains [sprouted voice, nasal voice or death grains] potherb of puskara honey and milk causes obstruction in blood or rohini circulation, atherosclerosis, or meat of pigeon epilepsy, sankhaka, goitre, fried in mustard oil rohini or death after eating: radish, milk risk of leprosy [or any skin garlic, sigru, arjaka, disorders] tulasi etc. potherb of jatuka honey and milk causes death or loss of or ripe fruit of strength, lustre, energy and nikuca prowess; severe diseases, impotency ripe fruit of nikuca black gram, pulse, jaggery and ghee they are antagonistic milk all sour substances antagonistic all fruits [except purely-sweet, like date] such as: amra, amrataka, matulunga, nikuca, karamarda, moca, dantasatha, badara, kosamra, bhavya, jambu, narikela, dadima, amalaka milk kangu, vanaka, makusthaka, kulattha, antagonistic black gram, nispava potherb of all used together are antagonistic and vitiate padmottarika Vata too much (kusumbha), sarkara and maireya (types of wine) and madhu Haridraka (a bird) fried with mustard oil antagonistic, vitiates Pitta too much Payasa (rice cooked taken with after-drink of Mantha (drink antagonistic, vitiates Kapha with milk) with roasted grain flour) too much Upodika (a pot cooked with: sesamum paste causes diarrhea herb) balaka (crane) varuni (a type of wine) antagonistic or kulmasa (grains soaked with water and then fried) Balaka (crane) fried with lard causes instantaneous death meat of peacock attached to stick of eranda, causes instantaneous death cooked on the fire with castor wood fuel, and mixed with castor oil meat of haridraka (a attached to the stick of haridra (a instantaneous death bird) plant)and cooked on haridra fire meat of haridraka mixed with ash and dust alongwith causes instantaneous death honey pippali fried with fish-cooking media and causes death kalamaci mixed with honey hot honey taken by a person afflicted by heat leads to death honey ghee in equal quantity, is antagonistic or rainwater in equal quantity, or lotus seed, [in any quantity] or followed by hot water [in any quantity] bhallataka followed by hot water is antagonistic kampillaka cooked with buttermilk antagonistic stale kakamaci roasted on iron rod antagonistic and bhasa Curd:. “ one should not take curd at night, One fond of curd and using [(curd is yogurt)] without ghee and sugar, without soup of it recklessly suffers from green gram, honey or amalaka, and that fever, internal hemorrhage, which is hot.” - erysepelas, anemia, giddiness

[[cite: Sutrasthana 7.62]]
and severe jaundice -

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.84]]
this whole chart

[[cite: Sutrasthana 26.86-101]]
OTHER FORMS OF ANTAGONISM OF FOOD: Type of Examples: Antagonism: of person that which is not wholesome for the person place Rough, sharp substances are used in arid zone. Unctuous, cold substances are used in marshy zone. Time rough, cold substances taken in winter. Pungent, hot, etc. taken in summer. Four types “similar is the antagonism of food and drinks in four types of agni” (probably: of agni manda- taking cold, unctuous, tiksna-hot, sharp, etc.. Insert info from Agni section) Dose Honey and Ghee taken together in equal quantity Suitability sweet, cold, etc. taken by a person accustomed to pungent, hot, etc.. Dosas “use of diet, drug and behavior similar to dosas in properties but adverse to the person’s practice “ Processing when edible becomes poisonous by particular processing, such as in case of peacock’s meat attached to the castor stick. Potency When Sitavirya and usnavirya substances combined together are taken. Bowels When too little, of mild potency and non-breaking drug is administered in (persons having ) hard bowels. When heavy, breaking and abundant ([high dosage])drug is administered to those having soft bowels. Health V-Vitiating substance is given to the person over-indulged in work, intercourse or exercise. When K-Vitiating substance is given to one indulged in oversleep and laziness. Order When one takes food before excreting feces and urine and without appetite or excessive hunger. Indication If hot things are taken after intake of pork, etc.., or cold things are taken after and intake of ghee, etc.. Contraindic ation Cooking cooking on damaged or bad fuel or if the grains are uncooked, over-cooked or burnt. Combinatio sour things taken with milk n palatability taking of un-liked things Richness (of if there is immature, over-mature or damaged rasa in a substance. qualities) Rules of food is not taken in privacy eating: -all this chart above
