# Fertility

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.3]]
Section 6: Fertility Aphrodisiacs p.470 Fertility p.493 Fetal Development p.511 Nursing p.530 Pediatrics p.535 Vajikarana (Aphrodisiacs) Quarter I: Benefits of aphrodisiacs Qualities of women Virtues of children Formulas Quarter II: Formulas Aphrodisiac routine Quarter III: Keeping a milk cow Formulas *Aphrodisiac routine Quarter IV: Variation in virility among men Formulas General Age for intercourse Cause of diminished semen Description of healthy semen FIRST QUARTER IN THE CHAPTER ON APHRODISIACS (2.1) Benefits of Aphrodisiacs: A conscious person should use aphrodisiacs regularly because virtue, wealth, pleasure and fame depend on it. [This is because Ayurvedic aphrodisiacs not only increase procreative virility, but also increase the strength of the dhatus, and strong dhatus lead directly to the above merits. (See ‘Strength of Dhatus’ section in Book I).] ‘It also gives rise to male offspring which is the resort of all qualities.’ [Interpretation: ‘all good comes from having male offspring.’] Ci2.1#3 Aphrodisiac Effect of a Woman: The foremost aphrodisiac is the repository which is the exhilarating woman. The favorite sense objects even singly are exceedingly pleasant what to be said of the female physique where they are stationed collectively (the multitude of the sense objects is only in the female body not anywhere else). [Re-write the above statement.] Moreover, the sense object located in woman is more pleasure-giving because there is special pleasure in women and the progeny too is dependant on woman. Ci2.1#4-6 Benefits of Women for Men/ Family: Virtue and wealthy, affluence and creation also depends on women. Ci2.1#6 Characters of the Best Aphrodisiac Woman: The woman who is: beautiful youthful endowed with auspicious features submissive ‘trained’ [See a book like the Kama Sutra for details.] Ci2.1#7 Importance of Compatibility of Husband and Wife: Due to diversity in likings of the people and ‘the fortune of women’, the qualities like beauty etc. get enhanced on finding a suitable man. Ci2.1#8 Signs That a Man Has Found the Perfect Woman for Himself: Behavior/ Traits of the Perfect Woman for Her Partner: The woman who being excellent in terms of age (youthful), beauty, voice and amorous movements enters into the heart quickly ‘due to fortune or other means’ she is like a celebration of the heart to him she gets into the similar mood as he is in she possesses a similar personality/ outlook as he does she is submissive she pleases him by engaging him in the things that he likes to do ‘she is like a noose for all the senses due to her excellent qualities’ when he is separated from her, he feels restless when he is separated from her, he feels as if there are no other women in the world when she is absent, he feels like his body is vacant of it’s senses by looking at her, he can overcome his grief, agitation, restlessness or fear by finding her, he gets solace by seeing her, he becomes exhilarated their sexual intercourse is always fresh due to exceeding impulse of sexual urge even on frequent sexual intercourse with her, he does not get satisfied ...this woman is the best aphrodisiac for him. Ci2.1#8-13 Men differ in their psychological behavior. The healthy man desirous of progeny should go to the woman who belongs to dissimilar clan [so, no in-breeding], is stimulating, exhilarated, free from complications and cleanly bathed (after menses). Ci2.1#14-15 Faulty-ness of a Man Who Has No Children: He is like a tree with only one branch, without shade, without fruit and having foul smell. ‘He is a lamp in picture.’ He is like a pond which has dried up. ‘He is a non-metal which looks like metal, or chaff which has been dressed up as a man.’ The childless man should be regarded as unstabilised, naked, vacant, having only one sense organ, and inactive. Ci2.1#16-18 Virtues of a Man Who Has Many Children: The man having numerous progeny is like one having numerous forms, faces, troops, actions, eyes, knowledge and selves. He is praised as auspicious, commendable, worthy, potent and numerously branched. Pleasure, strength, happiness, livelihood, expansion, large clan, fame, worldly attainments, happiness at the end of life and contentment depend on the progeny. Ci2.1#19-21 Importance of Aphrodisiacs: Hence one who desires progeny and all the virtues dependent on having progeny, as well as sexual pleasure should use aphrodisiacs regularly. - Ci2.1#22 Aphrodisiac Formulas: ‘The Bulk-Promoting Bolus’: This bolus is an excellent aphrodisiac, bulk-promoting and strength-promoting and by the use of this the man strengthened and sexually excited like a horse penetrates the penis fully into the vagina: 120gm each- sara (roots), kandeksu, iksuvalika, satavari, payasya, vidari, kantakarika, jivanti, jivaka, meda, vira, rsabhaka, bala, rddhi, goksuraka, rasna, kapikacchu, punarnava + 2.56Kg- new black gram 10.24L- water Cook all of the above together, until reduced to 1/4th volume. [strain] + paste of- madhuka, draksa, phalgu, pippali, kapikacchu, madhuka, satavari 2.56Kg [L] juice of each- vidari, amalaka, iksu 2.56Kg- ghee Cook all of the above until all the water has been removed. Filter well. + 640gm- powdered sugar 640gm- vamsalocana 160gm- pippali 40gm- marica 20gm powder of each- twak, ela, nagakesara + 320gm- honey Mix all of the above together. Form into solid boluses weighing 40gm each. Use: take according to digestive power. Ci2.1#24-32 The Aphrodisiac Ghee: This ghee gives ‘phallic strength’: 2.56Kg- newly harvested grains of black gram 2.56Kg- seeds of kapikacchu 160gm each- jivaka, rsabhaka, vira, meda, rddhi, satavari, madhuka, aswagandha [water] Boil all of the above together into a decoction [reducing to 1/4th volume]. [filter.] + 6.4L- cow’s milk 640ml-ghee 640ml juice of each- vidari, iksu Cook all of the above together on a mild fire. + 160gm- sugar 160gm each- vamsalocana 160gm- honey “0"gm- pippali [a type-o present in this book] Mix all of the above together. Use: take before meals. Dose: 40gm Ci2.1#33-37 The Aphrodisiac Pindarasas: This pandarasa (solidified meat-soup) is aphrodisiac, nourishing and strength- promoting. By the use of this, one strengthened and sexually excited like a horse penetrates the penis fully into the vagina: Part A; Utkarika (Halwa): sugar grains of black gram vamsalocana milk ghee wheat flour + ghee All of the above should be cooked together in the ghee. + Part B; Meat soup: sweet, good-smelling and hot cock [chicken] soup Put the prepared utkarika into the soup ‘so that it is solidified’. It is ready to use. Ci2.1#38-41 Other Aphrodisiac Pindarasas: In the same way as the above formula, pindarasa may be prepared from peacock, partridge and swan which promotes strength, complexion and voice and by the use of which the man behaves like a bull. Ci2.1#40-41 Aphrodisiac Buffalo Meat Soup: This excellent soup is aphrodisiac, strength-promoting and bulk-promoting: ghee black gram goat’s testicles + soup of- buffalo meat Cook all the above in the buffalo soup. It should be filtered. + sour fruit ghee Fry all of the above together. + a bit of salt, coriander, cumin and ginger Put these seasonings in the soup. It is ready. Ci2.1#42-43 The Other Aphrodisiac Soups: In the same way, the following soups may be used: sparrows in the meat soup of partridge, partridges in the meat soup of cock cocks in the meat soup of peacock peacocks in the meat soup of swan These should each be cooked with fresh ghee + they should be soured or sweetened, according to suitability + they should be added with ‘some scent’ [i.e., ela, twak, ...] [Divide this formula up into it’s 4 formulas .] - Ci2.1#44-45 Aphrodisiac Meat: Use of Milk after Sparrow Meat: If one takes milk after eating sparrow meat up to saturation he does not get his organ slackened nor is there ‘loss of semen in the night’. [during intercourse? ‘wet dreams’?] Ci2.1#46 Aphrodisiac Black Gram Formulation: One who does this is awakened with sexual impulse for the whole night: 1st: Eat: boiled sastika rice + plenty of ghee + black gram soup nd 2 : Drink: milk afterwards Ci2.1#47 Aphrodisiac Cock’s Meat Formula: With this formula, one does not get sleep in the night and his penis is ever stiffened: cock’s meat + crocodile semen Fry the meat in the semen. Ci2.1#48 Aphrodisiac Egg Juice: The following should be taken: ‘The juice extracted from the fish eggs’ + ghee fry the fish egg juice in the ghee. Ci2.1#49 The following egg juice should be taken: swan egg juice + ghee Fry the egg juice in the ghee. Ci2.1#49 The following egg juice should be taken: peacock egg juice + ghee Fry the egg juice in the ghee. Ci2.1#49 The following egg juice should be taken: cock egg juice + ghee Fry the egg juice in the ghee. Ci2.1#49 Here are the verses– When one takes the proper aphrodisiac medicine in time after getting the channels cleansed and the body purified, he behaves like a bull by that regimen which is bulk- promoting and strengthening. Hence, at first, one should apply the evacuative therapy according to strength and not the aphrodisiac formulations because they don’t succeed if applied in dirty body like trying to dye a dirty cloth. Ci2.1#50-51 Summing Up– Fertile soil, the woman, 15 formulations promoting potency and progeny, corpulence and strength etc. have been said on the quarter on sara roots etc. Ci2.1#52-53 SECOND QUARTER ON THE CHAPTER ON VAJIKARANA (2.2) -The quarter on aphrodisiacs sprinkled with milk, etc.- Ci 2.2 Fertility-Producing Sastika Gutika: By this [pills] even old man gets large progeny and everlasting sex urge: white sastika rice + milk The rice should be ‘fully sprinkled’ with milk. While still wet, it should be pounded in a mortar. Then it should be impregnated again with milk. [for 1 hr/ overnight]. Then the juice should be pressed out and filtered. + cow’s milk decoction of- seeds of kapikacchu decoction of- black gram decoction of- bala, mudgaparni, masaparni, jivanti, jivaka, rddhi, rsabhaka, kakoli, goksura, mdhuka, satavari, vidari, draksa, kharjura Cook the rice juice, the cow’s milk and the decoctions together. + powders of- vamsalocama, black gram, sali rice, sastika rice, wheat The above powders should be added and mixed in, so that the whole becomes solidified. + ample- honey, sugar Mix all of the above together. Form boluses. They should be the size of jujube fruit. + ghee The boluses should be fried in ghee. Use: Take according to power of digestion. Keep on diet of milk or meat-soup. Ci2.2#3-9 Aphrodisiac Formulation of Pupalika etc: One should collect the semen of sparrows, swans, cocks, peacocks, tortoises and crocodiles, cow-ghee, lard and the fat of kulinga (a type of sparrow), the powders of sastika rice and wheat; With these above drugs, various dietary items like pupalika, saskuli, vartika, pupa, dhana etc. may be prepared. By the use of these dietary preparations, one enjoys women with full satisfaction like a horse with stiffened and semen-filled organ. Ci2.2##10-13 ‘Fertility-Producing Juice’: By this even a weak and an old person attains a large progeny and is exhilarated sexually like a young man: 80gm each- seeds of kapikacchu, black gram, kharjura (fruits), satavari, srngataka, mrdwika + 640ml- milk 640ml- water Boil all of the above together until only 640ml total remains. Filter with a clean cloth. + 80gm- vamsalocana 80gm- sugar 80gm- fresh ghee Mix all of the above together. Use: Take mixed with honey. Keep on a diet of boiled sastika rice. Ci2.2##14-17 Aphrodisiac Milk: This formula is an excellent aphrodisiac: 40gm each- head (top) of the kharjura plana, black gram, payasya, satavari, kharjura (fruits), madhuka (flowers), grapes, seeds of kapikacchu + 2.56L- water Boil all of the above together, until reduced to 1/4th. + 640ml- milk Cook the above together until the water portion has been removed (so that the final volume is 640ml; the volume of the above milk). Use: eat boiled sastika rice with plenty of ghee along with this milk added with sugar. Ci2.2##18-20 Aphrodisiac Ghee: This is an excellent aphrodisiac and strengthening and promotes complexion, voice and body-bulk: jivaka, rsabhaka, meda, jivanti, both types of sravani, kharjura, madhuka, draksa, pippali, ginger, srngataka, vidari + water milk + fresh ghee Cook all of the above together into a ghrta. Ci2.2##21-23 Aphrodisiac Formula of Supernatant Layer of Curd: By this the person becomes endowed with complexion, voice and strength and sexually like a bull: supernatant fatty layer of curd (it should be pure and white like the autumn moon) + sugar honey marica vamsalocana smaller [green] cardamon Mix all of the above together. Strain through a clean cloth in a new jar. Use: This should be taken along with cooked sastika (boiled) rice having plenty of ghee. Thereafter one should take proper quantity of ‘rasala’. Ci2.2##24-26 Aphrodisiac Sastika Rice Formula: One becomes (sexually) like a bull if he uses the following rice formula: sastika rice which is white like moon-rays + plenty of ghee sugar honey milk Take/ mix all of the above together. Ci2.2##27 Aphrodisiac Pupalikas: One who desires to perform sexual intercourse like a horse and to discharge profuse semen like an elephant should eat these pupalikas and drink manda (concentrated portion) of varuni [wine] afterwards: ghee + eggs of- crocodile, hen powder of- sastika rice [rice flour] “In heated ghee the eggs should be put along with the powder.” So, just melt/ heat the ghee, then take off the heat and stir in the eggs and rice powder, and serve. Ci2.2##28-29 Benefits of These Aphrodisiac Formulas: by proper use of these formulations one becomes endowed with: good physique potency strength complexion sexually exhilarated ‘potent for women like an 8 year old horse’ Ci2.2##30 General Aphrodisiac Routines and Items: The following help to rejuvenate potency: whatever is pleasing to the mind beautiful landscapes sandy places hills favorite women ornaments perfumes garlands dear friends Ci2.2##31 Summing up: The 8 formulas described in this quarter should be used for potency as well as fertility. Ci2.2##32 THE THIRD QUARTER ON THE CHAPTER ON VAJIKARANA (2.3) Ci 2.3 Keeping a Milk Cow: One should keep a milk cow. He should feed it on the leaves of black gram, or sugar cane, or arjuna (leaves). The cow should be well-nourished, with 4 nipples. It should be brown or black. She should have her calf living and it should be of the same color. The cow’s horns should face upwards. She should be of mild nature. She should have thick milk. The milk of such cow, either boiled or un-boiled, is an excellent aphrodisiac. It may be taken alone, or with sugar, honey and ghee. Ci2.3#3-5 Aphrodisiac Milk: One who desires indestructible semen should use: milk + semen-promoting drugs vitalizer drugs bulk-promoting drugs galactogogue drugs Boil all of the above together. + flour ghee honey sugar Mix all of the above together. Ci2.3#6-7 The following [milk] formula should be taken. Even a 70 year old man taking this gets large progeny and is exhilarated sexually like a young man: 10gm each- meda, payasya, jivanti, vidari, kantakari, goksura, ksirika, black gram, wheat, sali, sastika + 2.56L- milk ‘1/2’ [let’s just say 2.56L]- water Boil all of the above together until only the milk portion (2.56L) remains. Filter. + honey ghee sugar Mix all of the above together. Ci2.3#8-10 The following formula provides progeny: milk of the cow described 2 pages earlier (the one fed on sugarcane, etc.) + a golden ring Boil the golden ring in the milk. [Allow it to cool.] + ghee, honey, sugar Ci2.3#11 Aphrodisiac Pippali Formula: By this one does not have any diminution in erection of the organs nor discharge of semen for the whole night: 30 fruits of- pippali These should be well-pounded. + 40gm- tila oil 40gm- ghee Fry the pippali in the oils. [Allow to cool.] + sugar honey Mix all of the above together. Use: Take with milk. Keep on a diet of sastika rice along with ghee extracted from milk. Dose: take according to strength. Ci2.3#12-13 Payasa Formula: This payasa formula is aphrodisiac: payasa (rice cooked with milk) prepared of: black gram, sastika rice + decoction of- goksura, vidari 4 times- milk + Plenty of- ghee Cook all of the above together. Ci2.3#14 Aphrodisiac Pupalika: These should be taken by those dealing with a number of women: 160gm powder of- (dried) fruits which are vitalizers, fatty and relishing [i.e. dates, figs, ] 160gm powder of seeds of- kapikacchu 160gm powder of- black gram + 320gm- tila 320gm- mudga 160gm- wheat flour 160gm- sali rice powder 160gm- ghee + milk Knead all of the above ingredients with the milk. Form into ‘pupalikas’ [balls]. Ci2.3#15-17 Aphrodisiac Satavari Ghrta: This is an excellent aphrodisiac: satavari + 10 times- milk ghee Prepare the above together. + sugar, pippali, honey Mix the above together. Ci2.3#18 Aphrodisiac Madhuka ‘Formulation’: This gives continuously impelled sex urge: 10gm powder of- madhuka + ghee, honey Mix the above together. Use: take with milk. Ci2.3#19s Characters of The Potent Man: The youthful person who is free from fear and disorders takes diet with ghee and milk cohabits frequently has strong determination ... he behaves always like a bull with women. Ci2.3#20-21 One behaves like a bull if: he confides with his close friends who are colleagues successful in endeavors inter-associated expert in arts equal in psychic condition and age endowed with excellence in family, nobility, favorite-ness, conduct and purity indulged in pleasures exhilarated free from pain and anxiety equal in conduct sincere dear sweet-spoken Ci2.3#22-23 One Gets Stimulated Like a Bull by the Following: massage anointing bath perfumes garlands adorations comfortable house, bed and chairs un-torn favorite clothes chirping of favorite birds tinkling of ornaments of women gentle pressing of the body by favorite women and others Ci2.3#24-25 Other Sources of Sexual Exhilaration: movement of drunken bees in ponds with lotus flowers fragrance of flowers like jasmine and waterlilly cool under-ground chambers rivers covered with foam mountains with blue tops rising of blue clouds nights with handsome moonlight breeze with pleasant touch fragrance of water lily night favorable for the sexual pleasure paste of saffron and aguru pleasant company blossomed orchards with chirping of koyola good food and drinks music sounds perfumery noble and disease-free psyche completion of task fresh sex urge women all the weapons [‘sex toys’] of sex young age intoxicating time Ci2.3#26-30 Summing up– 15 formulations have been said. Ci2.3#31 FOURTH QUARTER IN THE CHAPTER ON VAJIKARANA (2.4) Ci 2.4 The means by which a person gets strengthened, traficks into women as long as he desires and attains progeny quickly will be explained now. Ci2.4#3 Variation in Virility Among Men: Not all persons having strength get progeny. Even a man with a big body and plenty of strength may still be ‘weak in women’. On the other hand, there are persons with small stature, who are constitutionally weak and debilitated by diseases but who are very potent for women and get numerous offsprings. Some persons traffick into women frequently like sparrows, While others can not do so and discharge semen profusely like an elephant. Ci2.4#4-6 In this context, men may be categorized into 4 groups, according to virility: The 4 Types of Male Potency: 1) some men get strength ‘by time factor (seasonal effect)’ 2) some get strength by practice 3) some get strength by other means (aphrodisiacs) 4) some ‘are bulls by nature’ Ci2.4#7 Hence, I will describe the formulations which provide strength to the weak, promote further strength in the strong, and are easy in administration. Ci2.4#8 The physician, considering the strength, should administer the formulations for promoting semen and virility after cleansing the body by non-unctuous and unctuous enema. These enemas should be prepared with ghee, oil, meat-soup, milk, sugar and honey while the patient is kept on the diet of milk or meat-soup. #9-10 [***It is valuable to observe that the ‘cleansing measures’ here recommended are only the 2 enemas; no rough purgations. Further, the enemas are made of nourishing substances. And yet, Punarvasu assures that they are cleansing. And note that the patient has been put on a liquid diet for this period (milk or meat soup). Also, it may be that lightening drugs may be added to the enemas, such as madana, wines, pungents, haritake, etc. So, perhaps this Anuvasana-Brmhana Basti Set should be the standard for ‘cleansing’ for the weak. Clinically, it looks right!***] Aphrodisiac Meat Boluses: Aphrodisiac Pork Boluses: By drinking this soup along with the boluses, one gets indestructible semen: Part A: Boluses: pounded pork + black pepper rock salt Form the above together into boluses like jujube fruits [dumplings]. + heated ghee Roll the boluses in the heated ghee [fry? Or just heat? Probably fry lightly.] When they are stiffened, they are ready. + Part B: Cock [Chicken] Soup: cock soup + plenty of ghee aromatic substances curd pomegranate seeds Prepare the above soup ingredients together. Now dip the boluses into the soup, and cook the whole lot, without letting the boluses get broken up. Ci2.4#11-14 Aphrodisiac Boluses of Other Fatty Meats: In the same way as the above formulas, boluses and soups may be prepared of other fatty meats. These will also promote semen. Ci2.4#14 Aphrodisiac Buffalo Meat Soup: Part A: germinated [sprouted?] black gram, which has been cleaned and de- husked seeds of- kapikacchu + Part B: soup of buffalo’s meat plenty of- ghee curd pomegranate seeds [Cook the above together.] + coriander cumin ginger [Mix the above together.] Add the black gram and kapikacchu to the soup. Ci2.4#15-16 Aphrodisiac Fish Meat: Fresh fish meat or saphari fishes should be well-fried in ghee. This prevents loss of semen in women. One should eat rohita fish fried in ghee and cooled in goat’s meat soup + sour fruits. One should drink more of the soup after eating the fish and soup. This gives progeny. Ci2.4#17-18 Aphrodisiac Fish Pupalika: This pupalika is bulk-promoting, strengthening, providing exhilaration, charm and progeny and promoting semen profusely: pounded fish meat + asafoetida rock salt coriander + wheat flour Mix the above together [into boluses]. Cook [fry in ghee, then cook in water] to make pupalikas. Ci2.4#19-20 A Complicated Pupalika: This pupalika is bulk-promoting, strengthening, providing exhilaration, charm and progeny and promoting semen profusely: Part A: Liquid Filling: fatty, sour and salty fishes + buffalo meat soup Cook the fishes in the buffalo soup. + ‘In the soup, meat should be mixed’ [add meat? Blend up the fish meat?] black pepper cumin, coriander a little- asafoetida fresh ghee Mix [cook] all of the above together. + Part B: Pupalika [dumpling]: make pupalikas out of black gram. The liquid filling should be inserted into the middle of the black gram pupalikas. Ci2.4#19-22 ‘Masa’-etc. Pupalika: These cakes provide excellent sexual potency: flour of- black gram [‘masa’] seeds of- kapikacchu wheat [flour] sali rice sastika rice powder of- sugar powder of- vidari, iksuraka + milk Mix all of the above together. + ghee All of the above should be cooked [fried/ deep fried] in ghee to make pupalikas [cakes/ dumplings.] [So, this would be a sort of heavy doughnut.] Use: take with milk Ci2.4#23-24 The following formula is an excellent aphrodisiac, strength-promoting and bulk- promoting: 4Kg- sugar 4Kg- cow’s ghee 640mg powder of each- vidari, pippali 1.28Kg [powder]- vamsalocana 1.28Kg- fresh ghee Mix all of the above together. Keep in an earthen vessel. Use: take every morning Dose: according to power of digestion. [What you have here is basically cake icing.] Ci2.4#25-27 Ghee Providing Virility: This gives progeny: decoctions of each of the following should be prepared separately- satavari, vidari, masa [black gram], kapikacchu, goksura 640gm- ghee ‘8 times’ [8 times the milk, not the total volume of decoctions]- milk Cook all of the above together into a ghrta. + sugar honey Mix all of the above together. Ci2.4#28-29 Aphrodisiac Boluses: By the use of these boluses, a man is sexually exhilarated like a sparrow: ‘100 times quantity’ [of the ghee]- juice of vidari 2.56Kg- ghee Cook the above together. + ‘100 times’- cow’s ghee Cook the above together. + All of the following should be added in ‘1/4th quantity’: vamsalocana, iksuraka, pippali, seeds of kapikacchu sugar honey Mix all of the above together. Form into boluses of the size of an ‘udumbara’ fruit. Ci2.4#30-32 Aphrodisiac Utkarika (Halwa): By the use of this a man satisfies women like an elephant: 4Kg- sugar candy 2Kg- fresh ghee 1Kg- honey + ‘1/4th quantity [of the combined total of the above 3 ingredients]- water The above should be cooked together [until thickened]. + ‘Wheat flour in 1/4th quantity should be spread over a clean stone slab and kneaded well.’ ‘With this utkarika (halwa) shaped like a moon disc should be prepared.’ Ci2.4#33-35 General Information About Aphrodisiacs: Whatever is sweet, unctuous, vitalizer, bulk-promoting, heavy and exhilarating is aphrodisiac. Hence one should have intercourse after having been replenished with such aphrodisiac drugs, and only when one is impelled by his own sex urge and has been exhilarated by the qualities of women. After sexual intercourse one should take a bath and then go to sleep after taking milk or meat-soup. In this way his semen and strength are replenished. Ci2.4#36-39 Minimum and Maximum Ages for a Man to Have Intercourse: As fragrance is not manifested in a flower-bud but the same is found after it blossoms, similarly is the semen. The man who wants full life-span should not have intercourse before the age of 16 or after the age of 70. Ci2.4#40-41 Consequences of Too Young or Too Old Man Having Intercourse: The man who is too young has immature dhatus, and thus gets dried up quickly like a pond with little water. The old man shatters quickly like a wooden piece, dry, rough, worm-eaten and rotten to the touch. Ci2.4#42 Causes of Diminishment of Semen: old age anxiety diseases reducing by evacuative measures fasting sexual indulgence Ci2.4#43 Exhilaration is the Base of Potency: Even a saturated man does not get potency for sex due to wasting, fear, want of confidence, grief, finding fault with the woman, ignorant of the enjoyment with women, lack of determination and interest, because potency is based on (sexual) exhilaration which again depends on the strength of body and mind. Ci2.4#44-45 Location In the Body and Discharge of Semen: Semen is pervaded all over the sentient body. It is like sugarcane juice which is located throughout the whole sugarcane plant. It is like ghee is throughout curd [yogurt]. It is like sesame oil is pervaded evenly throughout sesame seeds. Ci2.4#47 Semen is discharged from it’s seat during sexual union of a man and a woman due to: pressure action determination This is like water being wrung out of a wet cloth. Ci2.4#47 The 8 Factors that lead to Discharge of Semen are: exhilaration thirst for sex instability sliminess heaviness subtleness outward tendency impulse of V Ci2.4#48 [The Body/ Semen] is known as the ‘material sub-stratum of the moving and omnipresent soul’. Ci2.4#49 Characters of Healthy Semen: That semen is undoubtedly fruitful which has the following characters: viscous sweet unctuous devoid of unpleasant smell heavy slimy profuse Ci2.4#50 Definition of Vajikarana (aphrodisiac): it is that which potentiates a man to have sex with women like a horse, and also gives him sustenance for this sex. Ci2.4#51 Summing up– the reason for the formulas the 12 excellent formulas the entities to be used before and after intercourse the ‘age when women are not to be entertained’ entire discussion on the nature of semen the definition of vajikarana –all this has been said. Ci2.4#52-53 Fertility/ Principles of Procreation (Child Birth)/ Conception Preparing health of husband and wife Correct manner of intercourse Influencing gender and character Regimens to stabilize the fetus Factors which damage the fetus Managing diseases during pregnancy Management by month Signs of approaching parturition Delivery Care of post-delivery newborn Protective rites Post-parturition diet and care Naming ceremony Healthy breast milk Treatment of disorders of breast milk The nursery [Preparation of the Health of Husband and Wife:] Listen to how the man having undamaged sperm and the woman having undamaged ovum and uterus may conceive excellent progeny.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.4]]
First of all both man and woman should undergo unction and fomentation and thereafter purify themselves by emesis and purgation so that they come gradually to normalcy. Thereafter they should apply non-unctuous and unctuous enema. Then the man should be managed with ghee and milk cooked with sweet drugs and the woman with oil and black gram. [Correct Manner of Intercourse for Conception:]

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.5]]
After the onset of menstruation, for 3 days and nights, the woman should observe celibacy, should sleep on the ground, take food with hands from and unbroken utensil and should not cleanse her body in any way. On the 4th day, she should be anointed and bathed from head and provided with white apparel alongwith the man. Now both the partners wearing white apparel and garland, with pleasant disposition and loving each other should enter into sexual intercourse on even day after bath if they desire a male child or on odd days if they desire a female child.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.6]]
One should not perform coitus with the female partner in her bending down or side position. In the former, V being strong inflicts the genital track and in the latter, if she is on her right side, K coming down blocks the uterus or if on her left side P situated there afflicts both ovum and sperm with burning. Hence she should receive the seed (semen) while in supine position because in that condition doshas remain in their normal position. After the act is completed, she should be sprinkled with cold water. The woman subjected to over-eating, hunger, thirst, fear, detraction, grief, anger or having desire for other man or excessive coitus does not conceive or gives birth to abnormal child. One should avoid the woman who is too young, too old, suffering from prolonged illness or afflicted with any other disorder. These very defects are also in the man. Hence man and woman should join together when they are free from all the defects.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.7]]
When they are stimulated well and are favorably disposed for coitus, they should go to the bed well-perfumed, well-covered, and comfortable after taking favorite and wholesome food without over-eating and which the man should ascend with his right leg and the woman with her left one.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.8]]
Then they should recite the mantras ‘ahirasi’ etc. and ‘Brahma’ etc. and then start the sexual act.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.9]]
[Influencing the gender and character of the fetus:] If the woman desires that they should get a son who is big, fair, with reddish brown eyes, vigorous, pure and mentally strong, after bath she should be managed with saturating drink prepared of white barley and mixed with honey and ghee which should be given to her after mixing it with the milk of white cow having similar calf in silver or bronze utensil at every food time for a week continuously. In the morning she should eat the preparations of sali rice and barley added with curd, honey and ghee or along with milk. In the evening, she should use white room, bed, seat, drink, dress and ornaments. In the morning and evening, she should gaze constantly at a white and big bull or a horse of good bread pasted with sandal and decorated with ornaments. She should also be entertained with pleasing and favorite stories. She should also look at the men and the women having pleasant look, words, behavior and activities and also the fair sense objects. Her companions and also the husband should entertain her with favorite and wholesome things but the couple should never mix together (sexually). Living with this method for a week, on the 8th day after taking bath from head she should put on undamaged white clothes and wear white garlands and ornaments. -

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.10]]
Then, first of all, the priest should select a place in the north of the house and having slope towards east or north. The located place should be pasted with cowdung and water and after sprinkling with water an altar should be made. On it’s west side, the priest should take his seat on an undamaged cotton cushion or the hide of a white bull in case of a brahmana, on the hide of a tiger or a bullock in case of a ksatriya and on that of a deer or goat in case of a vaisya. Having sit there he should collect the sticks of palasa, ingudi, udumbara or madhuka near the fire, spread the kusa grass, delimit with the boundary sticks and scatter the fried paddy grains, white and fragrant flowers. Then he should make the water vessel purified with sacred (mantras), process the ghee for oblation and place the horse etc. of the said complexion around the place.-

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.11]]
Then the woman expecting a son according to her desire should perform the rites along with her husband, taking her seat in the west of the fire and south of the priest. Then the priest pointing towards Prajapati should perform the desire-fulfilling rite in the genital parts of the expectant woman with the recitation of mantras as ‘visnur yonim’ etc in order to fulfil her desire. Then he should prepare the bolus after cooking it in an earthen vessel and offer as oblation to the fire thrice according to prescribed method. He should further give her the water pot purified with sacred mantras for all purposes of water. After the rite is completed she should go round the fire along with her husband first using her right leg. Then, after the brahmanas have invocated blessings, the man should first take the remaining ghee and then the woman without leaving any portion. Thereafter they should join together in sexual intercourse for 8 nights while using the said clothes etc. Thus they procreate a son according to desire.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.12]]
The woman who expects a son sky-complexioned with red eyes, broad chest and long arms, or that who expects the same black-complexioned, with black, soft and long hairs, white eyes, white teeth, vigorous and having self-restraint should observe the same procedure of oblation, only the paraphernalia would vary in respect of color. According to the (desired) complexion of the son, they should use apparel, bed, seat, flower etc.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.13]]
The woman belonging to the sudra clan should offer only salutation to gods, fire, brahmanas, preceptor, ascetics and accomplished persons.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.14]]
After hearing her desire, the woman should also be advised to travel around the localities mentally which are inhabited by the people simulating the son desired by her. Moreover, she should also be advised to use diet, behaviour, regimens and apparel customary to the above people. Thus the entire procedure is described which leads to the excellent result in respect of the desire for a son.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.15]]
Not only the above procedure causes a particular complexion but (the relative dominance of mahabhutas too play an important role). Tejas predominantly associated with ap and akasa gives rise to fair complexion. ‘That’ [tejas predominantly associated ] with prthvi and vayu causes black color. ‘Combined with all these in equal proportion leads to the production of sky-like complexion.’

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.16]]
In causation of particular psyche these factors operate– the psychic nature of the parents, frequent acquisition (of informations) by the mother, the past deed and the impact of a particular psyche due to practice (in previous life).

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.17]]
When the couple processed by the above method join together in sexual intercourse, the undamaged sperm combined with the undamaged ovum, in undamaged genital track and unaffected uterus certainly gives rise to embryo as in a well-washed clean cloth the good dye produces coloring instantly after the contact or the milk combined with curdling yeast attains the form of curd leaving it’s original character. The sperm also operates like this.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.18]]
The causative factor for the determination of sex in the fetus so formed has already been said. As an undamaged seed sown (in the field) follows the pattern of it’s natural characteristics like paddy carrying the characters of paddy, barley carrying the characteristics of barley and so on. Similarly, the male and the female sex of the fetus also follow the natural characteristics accordingly.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.19]]
Change of sex is effected before it’s manifestation by vedic rites properly performed because the actions performed with excellence of place and time certainly produce desired results otherwise not. Hence considering the woman as pregnant she should be administered pumsavana (measures which help procreate a male progeny) before the fetus is manifested. After taking two undamaged leaf-buds from the easterly and northerly branches of a banyan tree grown in a common place and putting them in curd alongwith two excellent black gram or white mustard seeds, it should be given to the woman to drink in pusya star. Similarly, the paste of jivaka, rsabhaka, apamarga and saireyaka– collectively or individually as required, added with milk; or putting a kudyakitaka (a type of insect) or matsayka (a small fish) in a handful of water should be given to drink in pusya star. Small and fire-colored man-shaped pieces of gold, silver or iron put in curd, milk or handful of water should be taken wholly in pusya star. In the pusya star itself, she should inhale the steam coming from the preparation of sali rice while being cooked. She should also use a drop with a cotton swab in the right nostril of the liquid made of the flour mixed with water and put on the threshold. Whatever useful measure for pumsavana is suggested by Brahmanas or reliable ladies, that should also be applied. Thus the measures for pumsavana are said.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.20]]
Hereafter I shall describe The Regimens to Stabilize the Fetus: Aindri, brahmi, satavirya, sahasravirya, viswaksenakanta– wearing of these herbs on head or in right hand; intake of milk or ghee cooked with the same; taking bath with the same in every pusya star. She should always keep these drugs with her. Over and above, she should also use constantly all the drugs of Jivaniya group (vitalizers) with the above methods. Thus the regimens which stabilize the fetus are described.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.21]]
These are the factors which damage the fetus: The fetus dies in the womb or comes out prematurely or is dried up of the pregnant woman sits on roughened, uneven or hard seat; suppresses the urge of wind, urine and feces, undergoes strenuous and unsuitable physical exercises, takes excessively sharp and hot food or eats very little. The fetus is also delivered untimely by injury, compression, frequent looking at ditches, wells and waterfalls, travelling on conveyance with excessive jerking or hearing unliked words or too much noise. She constantly lies down in supine position, the umbilical cord gets twisted around the neck of the fetus. The woman sleeping in open place and moving out in night gives birth to an insane; If she indulges in quarrels and fights, the progeny will be epileptic. One indulged in sexual intercourse to ill-physiqued, shameless, and devoted to women; One always under grief to timid, underdeveloped or short lived; One thinking ill of others to harmful, envious or devoted to women; The thief to exerting, wrathful or inactive; The intolerant to fierce, deceitful and jealous; One who sleeps constantly to drowsy, unwise and deficient in digestive power; One who takes wine constantly to thirsty, poor in memory and unstable in mind; one using mostly the meat of iguana to an offspring afflicted with gravels, stone or sanairmeha; One using pork mostly to the offspring having red eyes, obstructed respiration and very rough body hairs; One using fish constantly to the offspring with delayed closure of eyes or stiff eyes; One using the sweet things constantly to the offspring suffering from diabetes, dumb or over-obese; One using sour things constantly to the offspring suffering from internal hemorrhage and disease of skin and eyes; One using salt constantly to the offspring affected with early wrinkles and grey hairs or baldness; One using pungent things constantly to weak, deficient in semen and sterile; One using bitters constantly to consumptive, weak and undeveloped; One using astringents constantly to blackish progeny suffering from hardness of bowels or udavarta. The pregnant woman gives birth to a child suffering mostly from the respective disorders the etiological factors of which are used by her. The paternal defects in respect of semen should be understood on the lines of the mismanagement concerning mother. Thus the factors causing damage to fetus are said. Hence the woman desiring excellent progeny should particularly abstain from the unwholesome diet and behavior. Observing good conduct, she should managed herself with wholesome diet and behavior.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.22]]
Put all of the above into a chart. Management of Diseases During Pregnancy: The diseases of the pregnant women should be managed with diet and drugs consisting mostly of soft, sweet, cold, pleasant and delicate things. She should never be subjected to evacuative measures like emesis, purgation, head-evacuation, blood-letting, non-unctuous or unctuous enema except in emergent [emergency] conditions. Since the 8th month, she should be managed in emergent conditions responding to emesis etc. with mild emetics or other measures exerting similar action. * The pregnant woman has to be managed very cautiously like one carrying a full vessel of oil without agitating it.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.23]]
If the mother, due to mismanagement, shows blood during the 2nd or 3rd month, there is little chance of retaining the fetus because during this period the fetus lacks supporting strength.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.24]]
If she shows the discharge of menstruation during the 4th month onwards due to anger, grief, envy, jealousy, fear, terror, sexual intercourse, physical exercise, jerk, suppression of urges, sitting, sleeping or standing on uneven ground, excessive hunger and thirst or dirty food, I will explain the method for stabilizing the fetus. Immediately after the appearance of bleeding she should be advised to lie down on a bed covered with soft, comfortable, cooking bedsheet keeping her head slightly lower. Then a cotton swab soaked with (the powder of) yastimadhu and ghee which are kept in very cold water should be applied on the perineal region. She should also be anointed with ghee washed 100 times or 1000 times all over below the navel or she should take cold bath in a tub. Cloth pieces soaked with the juice of astringent plants having latex should be put inside the vagina, cotton swab of milk and ghee cooked with the leaf-buds of the nyagrodhadi trees should be kept inside the vagina. She should also take orally 10gm. of these preparations of ghee extracted from milk alone. She should take as lickable the stamens of lotus, utpala and kumuda (types of waterlily) mixed with honey and sugar. She should eat water chestnut, lotus seeds and kaseruka. She should take gandhapriyangu, nilotpala, lotus roots, unripe fruits of udumbara and leaf buds of banyan tree alongwith goat’s milk. She should eat soft, fragrant and cooked rice of red sali added with honey and sugar alongwith milk cooked with roots of bali, atibala, sali, sastika and sugarcane and kakili or she should eat the above rice alongwith the meat soup of common quail, grey partridge, kuranga, sambara, harina, ena and kalapucchaka (types of deer) and rabbit well-seasoned with ghee while seated in comfortable, cool and sufficiently airy place. She should be protected from anger, grief, exertion, sexual intercourse and physical exercise and should be entertained with soothing and favorite stories. Thus the fetus is stabilized.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.25]]
If the bleeding is associated with ama often it causes damage to the fetus because of their contradictory treatments.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.26]]
If a pregnant woman uses hot and sharp things and due to this bleeding or another discharge ensues from vagina when the fetus has gained sufficient strength, it does not develop further because of having been discharged. It stays for long and is said as upavistaka by certain scholars. When a pregnant woman constantly observes fasts and other religious vows in the state of her malnutrition and aversion to fats uses things which aggravate V, the fetus does not develop because it is dried up. This also stays for long without quickening. This is said as nagodara.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.27]]
I will explain the therapeutic management of both the above cases such as– the sue of medicaments which promote the growth of fetus such as ghee and milk cooked with drugs of bhautika (beneficial for the fetus), vitalizer, bulk-promoting, sweet and V-alleviating groups and also of immature fetus (eggs), proper diet alongwith the said ghee etc. having good nutrition and frequent use of vehicles, carriers (horses etc.) cleansing and movements.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.28]]
If the fetus is benumbed and does not quicken, the lady should be advised to take soft, sweet and cooled cooked rice of red sali, alongwith meat soup of falcon, fish, gayal cow, peacock, cock, and partrdge added with ghee or soup of black gram or soup of radish added with plenty of ghee. Moreover, she should be massaged frequently with lukewarm oil in the regions of abdomen, pelvis, groin, thigh, waist, sides and back.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.29]]
If the pregnant woman suffers from udavarta and constipation in the 8 month and is not fit to be managed with unctuous enema, she should be treated with non-unctuous enema which may alleviate the disorders. Udavarta, if neglected, may cause sudden death of the woman alongwith fetus or of the fetus alone. (In this condition) the decoction of the roots of virana, sali, sastika, kusa, kasa, iksuvalika, vetasa and parivyadha and also of bhutika, ananta, kasmarya, parusaka, madhuka and mrdwika prepared in milk added with half water containing the paste of priyala, bibhitakamajja (seed pulp) and sesamum seeds and a bit of salt should be used lukewarm as non-unctuous enema. When constipation is relieved, she should be sprinkled with lukewarm water and given stabilizing and non-burning food. Thereafter in the evening she should be treated with the unctuous enema by the oil cooked with sweet drugs. These enemas should be administered to her in bending down position.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.30]]
If the fetus dies in the womb due to excessive aggravation of dosas or excessive use of sharp and hot things, or suppression of the urges of wind, urine and feces, or use of uneven seat, bed, standing, compression and injury; or anger, grief, envy, fear, terror etc. or other over-exertive actions by the woman, her abdomen becomes still, stiff, blown up, cold and stony hard containing the fetus devoid of quickening. Besides, there is severe pain, labor pains do not arise, there is no discharge from vagina, eyes are slackened; she feels darkness before eyes, pain, giddiness, dyspnea and intense restlessness. The natural urges also do not appear properly. These are the sings and symptoms of a woman having a dead fetus.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.31]]
Some advise applications of the measures prescribed for expulsion of placenta in order to treat the fetus which is converted into a foreign body. Other recommend the incantation of mantras as prescribed in the Atharvaveda while others advise it’s extraction by an experienced surgeon. If the fetus be an immature one, then after extraction of the dead fetus, the woman should first be given adequate drink of any of the [following] sura, sidhu, arista, madhu, madira and asava (types of wine) in order to cleanse the uterus, to induce forgetting the pain and to provide exhilaration. Thereafter she should be given saturating, strength-protecting but non-fatty diet or gruel etc. that are suitable for the moment till the moisture of dosa and dhatu is absorbed. Afterwards she should be managed with administration of uncting substance, enema or diet processed with the drugs of appetizer, vitalizer, bulk-promoting, sweet and V-alleviating groups. In case of mature fetus, she should be managed with unction on the same day when the fetus is extracted.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.32]]
If the fetus is developing without any disorder, the following monthly regimen is advised. During the first month if there be suspicion of conception, the woman should take unprocessed milk cold and in adequate quantity at food times. She should take only the wholesome food morning and evening. During the second month, only milk cooked with sweet drugs; During the 3rd month milk added with honey and ghee; During the fourth month- she should take 10gm. of milk-butter; During the 5th month- ghee extracted from milk. During the 6th month- the above ghee cooked with sweet drugs; During the 7th month- the same as for 6th month. Women say that during this month because of appearance of hairs in the fetus, they cause burning sensation in the mother but Lord Atreya says that due to pressure of the fetus V, P and K reaching into the chest give rise to burning sensation, then itching which in turn causes kikkisa (streaking of the skin). To ameliorate this condition, she should take in food times butter processed with sweet drugs alongwith the decoction of kola (jujube). Besides, her breast areola should be massaged gently with the paste of sandal and lotus stalk; or the powder of dhataki, mustard and madhuka; or the paste of kutaja, arjaka seeds, musta and haridra; or the paste of nimba, kola, tulasi and manjistha; or triphala mixed with blood of prsat (spotted deer), deer and rabbit, massage with oil cooked with karavira leaves and sprinkling with water processed with jati and madhuka should be applied. When itching is felt, scratching of the part should be avoided so that the skin may not be torn or disfigured. If the itching be intolerable, it may be overcome by anointing and rubbing. During the period she should be kept on a diet consisting of sweet, V-alleviating articles, in a small quantity, free from fat and salt with a little after-drink of water. During the 8th month- she should take milk gruel added with ghee in food times. But Bhadrakapya it on the plea that it causes the disorder of paingalya (tawniness) in the fetus. On this Lord Punarvasu said– the risk of the disorder of paingalya may be there but it dies not indicate in any way that the above regimen should not be applied. (Rather in my opinion), the women following this remains free from disorders and gives birth to a child endowed with excellent health, strength, complexion, voice and compactness and the best in the entire clan. During the 9th month- she should be treated with unctuous enema with the oil cooked with sweet drugs. A swab soaked with the same oil should be placed inside the vagina to lubricate the seat of fetus as well as the entire genital tract. If the regimen as mentioned above is followed from the first to the nonth month, it softens the entities which hold the fetus, womb, waist, sides and back of the woman at the time of delivery, wind gets in normal course, urine and feces in normal state get through the passage easily; skin and nails also become soft, strength and complexion are improved and she delivers the child as desired, excellent and healthy with ease and in time.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.33]]
Before the 9th month the maternity home should be constructed in a place freed from bones, gravels and earthen pieces and in an ground having soils of good look, taste and smell. The door should be facing to the east or to the north. It should be made of the wood from bilva, tinduka, inguda, bhallataka, varuna or khadira or other trees recommended by the brahmanas well-versed in Atharvaveda. It should have excellent living space, plastering, roofing and door pans and should be provided with, by a good architect, fireplace, water store, place for wooden mortar, lavatory, bathroom and kitchen. The home should be comfortable for all the seasons.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.34]]
The materning home should be equipped with the following drugs and appliances– ghee, oil, honey, rock salt, sauvarcala, kala and bida salts, vidanga, kustha, devadaru, sunthi, pippali, pippalimula, gajapippali, mandukaparni, ela, langali, vaca, cavya, citraka, hingu, sarsapa, lasuna, kataka, kanakanika, nipa, atasi, balwaja, bhurja, kulattha, maireya, sura and asava (types of wine), two stone slabs [[for grinding/ pasting]], two pestles, two mortars, one untamed bull, two sharp golden and silver needles, sharp instruments made of steel, two cots made of bilwa wood, fuel of the wood of tinduka and inguda. Apart from these appliances, there should be many multipara women possessing friendliness, constant attachment, good manners, presence of mind, affectionate nature, freedom from anxiety, endurance and favorable disposition. Brahmanas well-versed in Atharvaveda should also be there. Besides these, whatever is deemed as necessary or advised by the brahmanas and the elderly women should be provided there.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.35]]
In the beginning of the 9th month, on an auspicious day when the moon is auspicious and in conjunction with an auspicious star and in auspicious karana and muhurta offering pacificatory oblations to the fire, cow, brahmana, fire and water should be made to enter fist. The grasses and water alongwith honey should be offered to the cows and barley grains, flowers and auspicious fruits to brahmanas who should be seated on their seats after offering them water first, and after saluting them and taking sips of water they should be requested to invoke blessings. Along with the chanting of auspicious mantras the women should enter into the maternity home following the cow and brahmanas and keeping them in the right side. Then she should wait for the time of delivery.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.36]]
These are the symptoms and signs of the approaching Time of Parturition– exhaustion of the body parts, malise on face, laxity in eyes, feeling of the removal of bandage from chest, coming down of the womb, heaviness in lower parts, pain in groin, perineum, waist, belly, sides and back; discharge from the vagina, lack of desire for food; thereafter starting of labor pains and flow of amniotic fluid.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.37]]
At the onset of labor pains a bed should be prepared on the ground covered with soft bedding which she should sit on. Then the women having the said qualities should attend to her surrounding and consoling her with agreeable and sympathetic talks.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.38]]
If, in spite of feeling labor pains, she does not deliver she should be told “get up, take one of the pestles and pound the grains put in the mortar slowly, now and then take deep breath and move in between”. Some advise like this, but it is not approved by Lord Atreya. He, on the contrary, says that severe exercise is always contraindicated for the pregnant woman particularly at the time of parturition because at the time in the delicate woman when all the dhatus and doshas are in mobile state, V impelled by the exercise with the pestle and getting opportunity may take away the life because the pregnant woman becomes treatable with difficulty particularly at that time. Hence the holding of pestle is discarded in the view of the sages while deep breathing and movements may be performed. She should be given the powder of kustha, ela, langalaki, vaca, citraka, cirabilva and cavya to smell which she should do frequently. Similarly the smoke of the leaves of bhurja or the heartwood of simsapa may be inhaled, in between she should be kneaded lightly after massaging with lukewarm oil in the region of waist, sides, back and legs. By this manipulation the fetus moves down.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.40]]
When it is felt that the fetus leaving the cardiac region is entering into (the lower part of) the abdomen, is being fixed into the brim of the pelvis, the labor pains are getting intensified and the fetus is moving downwards then at this stage she should be placed on the cot and be advised to strain. In her ear some favorite lady should recite the following mantras– “Ksitirjalam” etc. (May Prthvi, Ap, Tejas, Vayu, Visnu and Prajapati always protect you, the pregnant one, and promote the delivery of the fetus. O having auspicious look! you, the undistressed one, may deliver the undistressed son having lustre like that of karttikeya and also protected by him.) -#39 The women having the said qualities should advise her like this– “do not strain until the pains appear because who does so her effort goes in vain, moreover her progeny becomes abnormal and deformed or afflicted with dyspnea, cough, phthisis and spleen. As one does not get or gets with difficulty while making efforts for the unimpelled urges of sneezing, eructation, flatus, urine and feces, similar is the fate of the woman who strains for the delivery of the fetus untimely. On the other hand, as the suppression of the impelled urges of sneezing etc. gives rise to afflictions, the non-straining for the delive4ry of fetus in time produces similar results.” She should be asked to follow the instruction. Accordingly, initially she should strain mildly then gradually with stronger effort. While she is straining, the other women should speak in her ears– “just delivered a worthy son”. Thus she is filled with joy.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.41]]
When she has delivered the child, immediately it should be observed whether placenta has been expelled or not. In case it has not come out, one of the attending women should press strongly above the navel with the right hand and hold her on the back with the left one and thus shake her body strongly. The pelvic region should be rubbed with her heel. Her buttocks should be held fastly and be pressed strongly. The throat and palate should be touched with her hair braid. The vagina should be fumigated with the leaves of bhurja, kacamani and slough of the serpent. She should be asked to drink the paste of kustha and talisa mixing it in the soup of balwaja or strong spirituous portion of maireya and sura (types of wine), or the soup of horse gram, or decoction of mandukaparni and pippali. The paste of small ela, dewadaru, kustha, sunthi, vidanga, pippali, kalaguru, cavya, citraka and upakuncika; or cutting the right ear of the living untamed bull and pounding it on grinding stone should be kept for an hour in one of the decoctions of balwaja etc.; the liquid portion of this should be administered to the patient. A cotton swab soaked in the oil prepared with satapuspa, kustha, madana and hingu should be placed in her genital tract. Thereafter unctuous enema should be administered to her. The above liquid preparation added with madanaphala, devadali, iksvaku, dhamargava, kutaja, krtavedhana and gajapippali should be used in the form of non- unctuous enema. This non-unctuous enema leads to expulsion of the adhered placenta along with flatus, urine and stool because V does not tend to move contrarily. Flatus, urine and stool and other internal excrements cause adherence of placenta.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.42]]
[Care of the Post-delivery New-born child:] While the steps are being taken to expel the placenta, the following actions should be performed in respect of the newly born child, such as: rubbing of stone pieces at the root of the ears, sprinkling of cold or hot water over the face, thus he recovers the vital breath stopped due to distress so far. If the fetus is devoid of movements, he should be fanned with a winnowing basket having black flaps till he recovers. (All the above measures may be employed). When he recovers the breath and becomes normal, he should be bathed and cleaned well with water.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.43]]
Thereafter, his palate, lips, throat and tongue should be cleansed with the help of a finger having nail well-cut and putting a well-washed, cushioned cotton swab. After washing his mouth, his anterior fontanel in head should be covered with a cotton swab soaked in some fatty substance. Then vomiting should be induced by administering ghee added with rock salt.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.44]]
Then the processing of the cord for which the procedure is explained hereunder. After fixing the point at 8 fingers from the umbilical attachment the cutting point should be held tightly on both sides and cut with a sharp, half-edged instrument made of gold, silver or steel. The end of the attached portion should be tied with thread and attached loosely to the neck of the fetus. If the cut portion suppurates, it should be massaged with the oil prepared with the paste of lodhra, madhuka, priyangu, devadaru and haridra. The powder of the above drugs may also be applied over the part. Thus the processing of the cord is described well.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.45]]
On improper processing of the cord, there is risk of the complications such as ayamottundita (vertical swelling), vyayamottundita (horizontal swelling), pindalika (circular hardness), vinamika (marginal swelling) and vijrmbhika (umbilical hernia). This should be treated, according to severity, with massage, anointing and bathing with ghees which are free from burning effect and are able to alleviate V and P.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.46]]
Thereafter, the birth rite of the child should be performed such as- first he should be given to ingest the combination of honey and ghee processed with mantras as prescribed in scriptures. Thereafter by the same method, the right breast should be advanced to be suckled (by the child). A water pitcher with mantras should also be kept on the side of his head.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.47]]
Now the measures for his protection should be adopted. The maternity home should be surrounded by the branches of adani, khadira, karkandhu, pilu and parusaka. The seeds of mustard, linseed, rice and kanakanika should be scattered all over the maternity home. The oblation of offering of rice to the fire should be performed continuously twice a day till the naming rite is solimnised. At the door after the threshold a wooden pestle should be kept obliquely. A cloth packet containing caca, kustha, coraka, hingu, mustard, linseed, garlic, kanakanika and other drugs repelling evil spirits and well-tied should be kept at the front door. The same should be worn by the mother as well as the child in the neck and also put in cooking vessels, water jars, cot and both the panels of the door. There should be fire burning constantly with the fuel of kanakanika and tinduka wood within the maternity home. The said attending women and favorite friends should keep up the whole night near the mother for 10 or 12 days. Moreover, gifts, auspicious rites, blessings, praises, songs, playing musical instruments should be performed continuously in the home which should be amply provided with food and drinks and be full of affectionate and happy persons. The brahmana proficient in the Atharvaveda too should continuously offer propitiatory oblations to the fire both the times for the well-being of the child as well as the mother. Thus the protective measures are said.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.48]]
When the mother feels hunger one of the fats– ghee, oil, muscle-fat, marrow- should be given to her according to suitability in the maximum quantiity and mixed with pippali, pippalimula, cavya, citraka and sunthi. After she has taken the fat, her abdomen should be massaged with ghee and oil and wrapped round with a big clean cloth bandage so that V may not find space to produce disorder. After the fat is digested, she should take in proper quantity liquid gruel prepared with pippali etc. and added well with unctuous substance. She should take sprinkles with warm water both the times before the intake of fat and gruel. Thus maintaining for 5 or 7 days she should be saturated gradually. This is the code of the healthy conduct for the woman having recently delivered.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.49]]
If any disorder inflicts her during the period, it is curable with difficulty or is incurable because of the diminution and laxity of all dhatus caused by the growth of fetus and emptiness due to straining, pain, discharge of fluids and blood. Hence she should be treated with proper method particularly by applying massage, anointing, sprinkling, bath, food and drinks prepared with appetizer, vitalizer, bulk-promoting, sweet and V-alleviating drugs because the women having delivered particularly have vacant body.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.50]]
[Naming Ceremony:] On the 10th day, the mother alongwith the baby having taken bath with water containing all aromatic drugs, white mustard and lodhra, having put on light, undamaged and clean cloth, wearing auspicious, desirable, light and splendid ornaments, having touched auspicious objects, having worshipped the appropriate deity should receive blessing invocations from brahmanas possessing hair-lock on the crown of the head, white dress, and no deformity. Then the baby having been placed on the pack of undamaged cloth should be admitted with his head towards the east or the north. Thereafter father of the baby should say that the child is offering salutation to the deity and brahmanas and having said so, the child should be given two names– one based on the constellation at the time of his birth and the other popular name for the day to day use. Of them, the popular name should begin with ghosa (sonant) alphabets and end with antastha (semi-vowel) or usma ones. Besides, there should not be a letter with vrddhi (dipthong), it should be similar to that in preceding generations and should not be newly established. The constellatory name is similar to the deity of the constellation consisting of two or four letters.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.51]]
[Examining baby for Auspicious Features of Body Form:] After the naming ceremony is over, the child should be examined for the knowledge of the span of his life. These are the features of the children blessed with a long life: discrete, soft, sparse, oily, deep-rooted and black hairs; Firm and thick skin, naturally well-endowed slightly bigger in size, proportionate and umbrella-like head; broad, firm, even, united well with the temporals, endowed with upper signs (three transverse lines), corpulent, wrinkled and half-moon-shaped forehead, ears thick , having large and even flaps, equal, elongated downwards depressed at the back, having compact tragus and big meatus; eye brows slightly hanging downwards, disjoined, even, compact and large; eyes equal, having concentrated vision, with clear divisions and subdivisions, strong, lustrous and having beautiful front and corners; nose straight, with large nostrils, well-ridged and slightly depressed at the tip; mouth big, straight and having well-set teeth; tongue having sufficient length and breadth, smooth, thin and with normal color; palate smooth, well-developed, hot and red; voice profound, not poor, sweet, echoing, deeply risen and patient; lips neither too thick nor too thin having proper breadth, covering the mouth and red in color; large jaws; round, and not very large neck; broad and well-developed chest; hidden xiphisternum and vertebral column; distant breasts; [boys and girls] unbending and stable sides; arms, legs and fingers round, developed and long; hands and feet big and developed; nails stable, round, unctuous, coppery, high and tortoise-shaped; navel whirled clock-wise and deep; waist 1/3 less then chest (in breadth), even, having well-developed muscles; buttocks round, with firm and developed muscles, not too elevated; thighs tapering downwards, round and well-developed; shanks neither too corpulent nor too thin, resembling that of deer’s foot, with hidden blood vessels, bones and joints; ankles neither too corpulent nor too thin; feet possessing the above features and tortoise-shaped. (Apart from these anatomical features) the functions relating to flatus, urine, stool and sexual organs and also sleep, vigil, exertion, smiling, weeping and suckling as normal indicate the long life-span. Other entities also, which are not mentioned here, if endowed with normal features, are desirable while the contrary ones are undesirable for long life. Thus the features of the person having long life are explained. [Put all this page into a chart.]

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.52]]
Now I will explain the examination of wet-nurse: One should say “Bring the wet-nurse which belongs to the same caste, in youthful age, submissive, free from impatience, deformity, addictions, ugliness and loathsomeness; born in the same place, not mean-minded or indulged in mean acts, born in a good family, having affectionate disposition towards children, free from diseases, having living male children, having profuse lactation, free from carelessness, not sleeping on excrements, not married to a man of lower caste, skill in management, clean, having dislike for uncleanliness and endowed with excellence of breasts and breast milk.[“]

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.53]]
The excellence of breasts consists of breasts not too high, too long or too corpulent; having nipples of appropriate size and easy in suckling. Thus the excellence of breasts.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.54]]
The excellent milk has normal color, smell, taste and touch; dissolves completely in water if milked in a water-pot because of it’s (watery nature). Such milk is nourishing and health-giving. Thus is the excellence of breast milk.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.55]]
The breastmilk having contrary characters should be taken as abnormal. The features are– the breast-milk having blackish or reddish color, astringent as subsidiary taste, non-sliminess, unmanifest smell; which is rough, thin, frothy, light, non- saturating, emaciating and causing V disorders should be known as affected by V. That which has blue, yellow or coppery tinge; bitter, sour or pungent as subsidiary tastes, fleshy or bloody smell, too hot and causing P disorders should be taken as affected by P and that which is exceedingly white and sweet, has salty as subsidiary taste, smell as that of ghee, oil, muscle-fat and marrow, is slimy, thready, precipitating in water and causing K disorders should be known as affected by K.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.56]]
If according to the specific features of these 3 disorders of breast milk, emesis, purgation, non-unctuous and unctuous enema are administered in respective disorders according to dosas, the disorders are alleviated. Food and drink of the woman having affected breast milk should consist mostly of barley, wheat, sali and sastika (types of rice), mudga, harenu and horse gram (pulses), sura, sauviraka, maireya and medaka (fermented liquors), garlic and karanja (vegetables). Measures should be applied after considering the specific morbidity of the breast milk. Administration of the decoction of patha, sunthi, devadaru, musta, murva, guduci, indrayava, kiratatikta, katukarohini and sariva is commended in these disorders. Moreover, the use of other bitter, astringent, pungent and sweet drugs is recommended keeping in view the specific disorder, dosage and time. Thus galacto-depurent measures are said.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.57]]
Galactogogues: Galactogogues are: Wines (except sidhu), Domestic, marshy and aquatic vegetables Domestic, marshy and aquatic animal meats Domestic, marshy and aquatic cereals Food predominant in liquids Sweet, sour and salty items Herbs possessing latex, Intake of milk Rest Use of decoction of the roots of virana, sastika, sali [rices], iksuvalika [[sugarcane]], darbha, kusa, kasa, gundra and itkata. -Thus galactogogues are said.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.58]]
When the wet-nurse has sweet, copious and pure milk, she should take bath, apply after-paste, put on white dress and wear one of these herbs- aindri, brahmi, satavirya [satavari? ‘100-strength’? ‘sheeta-cooling-action’? ], vatyapuspi, viswaksenakanta. Then taking the baby with his face towards the east, she should made him suckle the right breast first. Thus the procedure about the wet nurse is said.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.59]]
[The Nursery:] Hereafter I will describe the nursery for the child. It should be well-planned by the architect. It should be spacious, beautiful, free from darkness and access of wind, well-ventilated, strong, inaccessible for various animals, rats and insects, distinct places for water, pounding, urinal, lavatory, bathroom and kitchen, comfortable in particular season, equipped with cot, chairs and beddings according to season. Moreover, protective measures, offerings, auspicious rites, oblations and expiatory rites should be performed well there and it should be full of clean and elderly persons, physician and affectionate people. Thus the method of nursery is explained.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.60]]
The cot, chair, beddings and coverings for the child should be soft, light, clean and perfumed. Those having contact with sweat, excrements and insects or soiled with urine and feces should be discarded. If there be no additional ones, the same may be used after they are cleansed and dried and well-fumigated.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.61]]
For fumigation of clothings, cots, beddings and coverings, barley, mustard, linseed, asafotida, guggulu, vaca, coraka [,] vayahstha, golimi, jatila, palankasa, asokarohini and slough of serpent mixed with ghee should be used.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.62]]
Amulets to be worn by the child be made of the tip of the right horns of the alive rhinoceros, deer, gayal or bull; the herbs like aindri etc. or jivaka and rsabhaka, or whatever the brahmanas conversant in the Atharvaveda may prescribe.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.63]]
Toys for the child should be variegated, sound-producing, beautiful, not heavy, without sharp ends, those which cannot enter into the mouth, are not fatal or terrifying.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.64]]
Frightening the child is not proper. Hence when the child weeps or does not eat or is attracted to somebody else, one should not try to subside him by frightening with calling the names of raksasas, pisacas, putana etc.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.65]]
If some illness comes to the child, the physician after examining cautiously the constitution, etiology, prodroma, symptoms and therapeutic suitability and knowing about all the factors should start the treatment with sweet, mild, light, fragrant, cold and beneficial measures keeping in view the peculiarities of the place and time because the children are suited to such measures and they get prolonged relief from the same. In case of health, he should be maintained on the code of conduct for the healthy using the things contrary to place, time and his self-constitution. The unwholesome habits should be changed gradually to the wholesome ones and thus all unwholesome should be avoided. Thus he attains the excellence of strength, complexion, body and life-span.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.66]]
“In this way, the child should be looked after till he is adult and gets skill to acquire virtue and means of sustenance.”

[[cite: Sharirasthana 8.67]]
Thus the measures for fulfilling the desire to have a son are described following which properly one attains sufficient honor without any envy for others.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.2-3]]
Fetal Development “Different Clan”/ Fetal Development, Reincarnation Sa 2 “What is that of a man which having 4 constituents and 6 sources and which coming out of him while cohabiting with a women of a different clan in a lonely place after the period of her menses is converted into embryo in the women.”

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.4]]
The wise call it ‘sukra’ (semen), which is implanted for the origin of the embryo. It is constituted of 4 quarters: vayu, agni, prthvi and ap (4 mahabhutas) and is originated from (food consisting of) 6 rasas.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.5]]
How and with what factors is the fetus delivered fully developed in time and with ease? How does even a fertile women face delay in conception and why sometimes is the embryo destroyed?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.6]]
By the excellence of sperm, ovum, the self, uterus and time and by management with wholesome diet the normal fetus gets delivered in fully developed state, in time and with ease.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.7]]
Though fertile, a women gets conceived after a long time due to defects in genitals, mental worry, derangement of sperm, ovum, diet and behavior; absence of proper timing and diminution of strength.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.8]]
The menstrual blood obstructed by V in a women is taken as pregnancy sometimes by the ignorant. The blood not flowing out and gradually accumulated produces signs and symptoms of pregnancy.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.9]]
When that blood is discharged out due to exposure to fire, the sun, exertion, anxiety, other diseases and intake of hot food and drinks, some people observing the same, though it is not fetus, say it as destroyed by the evil spirit.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.10]]
The body (of the fetus) is not desired for the purpose of eating by those (evil spirits) eating away ojas and moving in nights. If they do not get entrance into the mother’s body and inflict her ojas, they would not be able to destroy the fetus.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.11]]
Why does one female get male child? Why does one get twins- male or female, separate or joined, or several children [at once]? Why does one deliver the child with delay? Why does one of the twins develop more?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.12]]
One gets female or male child due to dominance of ovum or sperm respectively.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.12]]
When zygote is split into 2, the twin is formed and the female or male character of the same is determined by the relative predominance of ovum or sperm respectively.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.13]]
When the zygote is bifurcated with dominance of sperm the women delivers male twin jointly or with that of ovum she delivers female twin jointly.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.14]]
A women delivers that number of children due to past deeds and god’s pleasure in which the excessively aggravated V afflicting the union of sperm and ovum splits the same variously.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.15]]
If the fetus does not get nourishment and consequently gets dried up or discharged, the women delivers the child after a long time when the fetus is developed even in several years [!].

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.16]]
Due to past deeds and uneven bifurcation of the union of sperm and ovum one in the twin develops more in the womb while the other one is less. Thus there is also differentiation in the twin.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.17]]
Why does the progeny become as hermaphrodite, pavanendriya, samskaravahi[,] narasandha or narisandha (sterile man or women), vakri, irsyabhirati and vatikasandhaka?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.18-21]]
In case the zygote has sperm and ovum equally or is damaged in ‘genitci’ [genetic] portion the progeny has characters of both female and male and as such is called ‘Dwiretas’ (hermaphrodite). V having afflicted the location of semen in the fetus causes Pavanandriya (devoid of semen). When V obstructs the passage of the location of semen, it causes Samskaravahi (condition of aphrodisia). When the parents have sluggish and diminished reproductive factor, are weak, unstimulated and with damaged genetic portion, they cause the 2 disorders: male and female sterility. Due to mother’s lack of desire (for coitus) or complicated posture (during coitus) and also due to genetic deficiency of father, Vakri (with curved organ) is caused. Irsyabhirati is caused if the parents are subdued by jealousy and have mild passion. When the testicles get destroyed by aggravation of V and agni, Vatika Sandhaka is produced. “Thus 8 types of genetic sexual disorders due to past deeds should be [known and] determined.”

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.22]]
What are the symptoms of conception which has just taken place? What are the signs and symptoms of female, male and ‘enunch’ [eunich] fetus impregnated in the womb? What is the reason of resemblance of the child?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.23]]
Salivation, heaviness, malaise, drowsiness, horrpilation, distress in cardiac region, contentment, holding up of zygote in uterus– these are the symptoms of the conception which has just taken place.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.24]]
Activities mostly in left parts, desire for man, womanly dreams, drinks, food, conduct, and activities, fetus stationed in the left side of the womb, ‘gravid uterus not round’, profuse lactation in the left breast– these indicate the female fetus.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.25]]
Symptoms contrary to the above indicate the male fetus. The third sex (enunch) is indicated by the mixed symptoms.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.26]]
A woman gets child resembling that which her mind is attracted to during conception. [So, if she is thinking about a male child during conception, she will get a male child.]

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.27]]
All the fetuses have 4 mahabhutas (all except akasa) which are fourfold such as– maternal, paternal, nutritional and self-borne. Because of them the dominant factors arisen out of the past deeds of the parents determine resemblance of the physical appearance. Likewise, resemblance of mental faculty is also determined by the past life or species. [So, if a person had been an eagle in the previous reincarnation, he may be a sharp thinker in the present life. If he had been a cow in the previous reincarnation, he may be very compassionate in this life.]

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.28]]
Why does a woman deliver an abnormal child with deficiency or excess of organs or deranged sense organs? How does the self transmigrate from one body to another and which is it ever associated with?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.29-30]]
Due to defects of genes, the self, past deeds, uterus, time and mother’s food and behavior, the vitiated dosas produce various abnormalities in shape, complexion and sense organs. As in the rainy season, wood, stone pieces and water current cause derangement in a tree situated in the river stream, doshas cause abnormalities in fetus situated in the womb.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.31-36]]
The self along with subtle 4 bhutas and with speed like that of mind transmigrate from one body to the other according to past deeds. It can not be seen without divine visual sense. He is omnivagant, sustains all bodies, performs all actions, takes all forms. He is the source of consciousness, transcending all senses, ever-united and closely attached. In the body, bhutas are 16 (out of 4 bhutas each being of 4 types)-- such as caused by maternal nutrition, the self, mother (ovum) and father (sperm). Out of them, 4 are associated with the self and the self, in turn, depends on these 4 (for his manifestation). The bhutas derived from mother and father are represented by ovum and sperm in the fetus. Those by which the sperm and ovum are nourished are derived from (mother’s) nutrition. 4 bhutas are derived from past deeds which having merged with the self enter into the fetus because the self with seed-like character always transmigrates himself from one body to the other (in a cycle order). According to past deeds, form arises from (the past) form and mind from (the past) mind. Whatever difference is observed in physique and psyche is caused by rajas and tamas as well as the past deed.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.37-38]]
The self is never dissociated with too subtle and sense-transcending (bhutas), past deeds, mind, intellect, ego and other evils of the products (of primordial nature). Mind is associated with rajas and tamas; all defects are caused by ignorance. The cause of movement and inclination is defective mind and potent past deeds.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.39]]
Whenceforth are the disease? What is their remedy? What is the cause of happiness and sorrow? How should physical and mental disorders once subdued not recur?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.40]]
Intellectual error, unbalanced use of senses and consequence of time; these 3 are the causes of all the disorders. Similarly, the remedy of all disorders consists of the balanced use of intellect, senses and time.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.41]]
Virtuous acts bring forth happiness, while the contrary ones lead to sorrow. Sources of diseases is body and mind, when these body and mind are absent, the disease cannot recur.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.42]]
The continuity of physique and psyche is beginningless. Their absence [achieving enlightenment; freedom from the physical world] can be brought out only by excellent restrain, memory and knowledge.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.43]]
Even though the above-mentioned 2-fold seats of diseases exist, one should always take precautions against diseases. One having overcome the senses does not fall a prey to diseases except predestined at the moment.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.44]]
The deeds of the previous life are known as daiva (fate) and those of the present life as paurusa (personal effort). These in unbalanced way cause diseases while in balanced way avert the diseases.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.45]]
One eliminating the accumulation of doshas of (early winter) in (spring), those of summer in early rains and those of rainy season in autumn, never suffers from seasonal disorders.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 2.47]]
The man who uses wholesome diet and behavior, moves cautiously, is unattached to sensual pleasures, donates, observes equality, is truthful, forbearing and devoted to the persons of authority becomes free from diseases. -#46 One who is endowed with excellent intellect, speech and action leading to happy consequence, submissive mind, clear understanding, knowledge, penance and continued effort in yoga, does not fall a victim to diseases.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
(( All of the above is from Chapter 2 Sarirasthanam pages 412-418 )) OM NAMAH GURU OM NAMAH SRI PUNARVASU ATREYA ‘Descent of Embryo’ Su 3 When there is cohabitation of man having undamaged sperm and woman having undamaged genital tract, ovum and uterus during the rtukala (opportune period) and consequently the conscious (self) impelled by mind descend into the zygote situated in the uterus, the embryo is formed. It grows with the utilization of suitable nourishment and managed properly, devoid of abnormality. Then at the proper time, while endowed with all the sensory organs, well developed body and excellence of strength, complexion, mind and compactness, it is delivered with ease. The embryo is produced by these factors- mother, father, self, suitability and nutrition and mind is also there as an associate.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
‘No’ said Bharadwaja, ‘Why? Because none of the factors- mother, father, self, suitability, use of nutrients in various forms such as- drinkables, eatables, chewable and lickables, produces embryo nor does mind descend from the other world into the embryo.[‘] .1

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
If the parents were capable of producing the embryo, the majority of men and women who have longing for sons should produce sons only by cohabiting with the desire therefor or those desiring daughters should produce the same. Moreover, none of the men and women should be childless nor should such persons be aggrieved (because of having no progeny). .2

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
The self also does not produce himself. Because in that case the question would arise whether the self does it while born or unborn and in both ways it is untenable. Because the born self cant’ produce himself as he is already there and how would the unborn one would do as he is non-existing, hence in both ways it is illogical. Moreover, suppose, the self is capable of producing himself, why does he not give birth only in desired species and also as endowed with supreme power, unobstructed movements, power of taking forms at pleasure, brilliance, strength, speed, complexion, psyche and compactness and also as devoid of old age, disease and death, because the self wants himself to be like this or even better. .3

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
The embryo is also not caused by suitability because if it were so, the person using suitable things alone should get progeny and on the other hand, those using unsuitable things should be wholly childless but both are seen in both cases. .4

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
The embryo has also no causal relation with nutrition because in that case none of the men and women should be childless as there is none who do not take nutrition. If it is meant that excellence of nutrition produces embryo, then the persons using the meat of goat, sheep, deer and peacock, cow’s milk, curd, ghee, honey, oil, rocksalt, sugarcane juice, green gram and sali rice alone should get offspring; and those eating syamaka, varaka, uddalaka, koradusaka, tubers and roots (inferior cereals and edibles) should be wholly childless. But both are seen in both cases. .5

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.3]]
Not also the psyche descends from the other world into the embryo because in that case nothing of the past life should be unknown, unheard or unseen but it does not remember anything. .6

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.4]]
Therefore, I [Baradwaja] say– the embryo is not produced of mother, father, self, suitability, nutrition and the psyche is also not associated in this.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.5]]
Lord Atreya said– ‘no’, all these entities combined together give rise to embryo.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.6]]
The embryo is produced by mother. There can’t be origin of embryo without mother nor can the viviparous ones be produced without her. The entities which are particularly maternal and are produced from mother are these such as– skin, blood, flesh, fat, navel, heart, kloma [pancreas], liver, spleen, kidneys, urinary bladder, colon, stomach, intestine, rectum, anus, small intestines, large intestines, omentum and mesentary– these are derived from mother.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.7]]
The embryo is produced from father, there can be no origin of embryo nor can there be birth of viviparous beings. The entities which are particularly paternal and are derived from father are these such as– head hairs, beards-mustaches, nails, body hairs, teeth, bones, veins, ligaments and semen (these are derived from father).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.8]]
The embryo is produced of the self. The self of embryo is the internal self which is known as ‘jiva’ (source of life) and also as ever-continuing, devoid of illness, old age, death and decay; not subjected to incision, excision, agitation; having universal forms and actions, unmanifest, beginningless as well as endless and without any transformation. He entering into the uterus and combining with sperm and ovum produces himself in the form of embryo that is why the embryo is called as ‘the self’. The birth of that self is not possible because of his beginning-less-ness. Hence (both the statement that) he produces the unborn embryo while born and unborn are incorrect. The same fetus by the lapse of time attains the stages of childhood, youth and old age gradually. ‘During the stage which he exists in, he is called as born (or become) while during the preceding stage he was would be born (or become)’. In this way, he is both born and unborn simultaneously. Where both these– born-ness and unborn-ness– are present he is produced while born and the same in future conditions produces himself while unborn. In fact, birth is only transformation in respect of age and conditions. For instance, in spite of sperm, ovum and the self, they do not attain the state of embryo until they are combined together, this comes into existence by combination. Similarly, the same person does not attain fatherhood before the birth of progeny which thereafter does. In the same way, the embryo, though existing, is said as born or unborn in respective stages.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.9]]
Mother, father or the self are not able to effect at pleasure in respect of all entities of the embryo. Somewhat they do by themselves and other under the influence of the paste deed, at some places their instruments are potent while at others they are not. Where there is excellence of instruments like psyche etc. they produce effect at pleasure according to strength otherwise the results are contrary. It does not mean that due to defect of instrument, the self himself has no effective role in production of embryo because the knowers of the self have observed that the desired species, supreme power and emancipation are dependent on the self. There is none else agent of happiness and misery. The embryo wile being born can not be produced by the factor other than the self. The sprout can not grow from non-seed (that which does not poses the character of seed).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.10]]
The aspects of embryo caused by the self are these such as– birth in a particular species, life-span, self-knowledge, mind, sense organs, respiration, impulse, sustenance, characteristic physiognomy, voice and complexion, happiness, misery, desire-aversion, consciousness, restraint, intellect, memory, ego and will. (These are caused by the self).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.11]]
The embryo is produced from suitability. No factor other than the use of unsuitable things causes sterility in men and women nor is there any abnormality in the embryo. Three doshas even vitiated and spreading over the body in men and women using unsuitable things do not affect the conception of embryo until sperm, ovum and uterus are damaged. On the other hand, in men and women using suitable things and even though having sperm, ovum and uterus undamaged and cohabiting in opportune period, conception does not take place because of non-descent of the life-principle. The embryo is produced not only from suitability alone but from the aggregate of all the factors. The entities derived from the suitability are these such as– freedom from diseases, illness, and greed; cheerfulness of senses, excellence of voice, complexion and reproductive factor (sperm and ovum), and excessive stimulation (these are derived from suitability).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.12]]
Embryo is produced from nutrition. Without nutrition even survival of the mother would not be possible, so what to speak of the growth of the embryo? By malnutrition, conception of embryo is not possible but proper nutrition alone is not capable for this, the aggregate of all factors is the cause. The entities derived from nutrition are these such as– formation of the body, growth, continuance of vital breath, contentment, corpulence and vigor. (These are derived from nutrition).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.13]]
The psyche is an associate in this which alongwith with life-principle comes in contact with the body; preceding the departure of which there is contrast in conduct and inclinations, all senses are deranged, strength is diminished, diseases grow, devoid of which one expires; which is known as ‘mind’, the supporter of the sense organs. The psyche is of 3 types– pure, rajasa and tamasa. The quality which is dominant in mind associates in the subsequent birth as well. IN case the psyche is pure, one recollect the (incidents of) the previous birth also. This sort of recollective knowledge comes forth by the association of mind with the self on the basis of which the person is said as ‘Jatismara’ (one who recollects the previous life). The entities which are derived from the psyche are these such as- inclination, conduct, cleanliness, aversion, memory, attachment, detachment, envy, valor, fear, anger, drowsiness, vogro, intensity, softness, seriousness, instability and other psychic features which will be described later on in the context of classification of psyche. Psyche is of various types which are found all in a person but not simultaneously. One psyche is said because of dominance of one or the other type.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.14]]
Thus the embryo is produced from the aggregate of all these factors. For instance, the roof-chamber is constructed from the aggregate of several materials and the chariot is formed from the combination of several parts. Therefore I [Atreya] said– the embryo is produced from mother, father, self, suitability and nutrition and the psyche as an associate in this act. (As said Lord Atreya).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.15]]
Bharadwaja again asked- If the embryo is produced from these various procreative factors, how is it unified? If unified, how does the embryo born of the aggregate take the human shape as man is born of a man? In case this is argued that as a man is born of a man, it takes the human shape such as cow is born of a cow, horse of a horse and so on; the earlier proposition that it is made of aggregate would become untenable. If man is born of a man, why are the offsprings of the dull, blind, hunch-backed, dumb, dwarf, with nasal utterance, freckles, insanity, leprosy and leucoderma not similar to their parents? If it is solved like this that the self perceives visions with his own visual organ, sounds with the auditory organ, smell with the olfactory organ, taste with the gustatory organ, touch with the tactile organ and knowables with the intellect and as such the offspring of the dull etc are not similar to their parents, then it would go contradiction of the proposition itself. In this case, the self, in presence of the sense rogans, will be conscious otherwise unconscious and that self where both conscious as well as unconsciousness exist, will become changeable. If the self perceives the objects with the visual organs etc., then in the absence of these organs he would not perceive the sense objects and thus would be unconscious and thereby non-cause which would destroy the basis of the self. Thus this proposition would be reduced to mere jugglery of words and quite meaningless. (Thus said Bharadwaja).

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.16]]
Atreya replied– It is already said earlier that the psyche associated with the life- principle comes in contact with the body. How the embryo is formed in human shape from the aggregate and man is born of a man is explained hereunder. There are 4 types of genetic source of animals- Jarayu (fetal ‘memberances’), egg, sweat and coming out of the earth. Of these 4 classes, each class has innunerable variations because of innumerable shapes of creatures. In case of viviparous and oviparous animals, these precreative factors attain the shape according to the species where they operate. For instance, gold, silver, copper, tin and lead poured into respective moulds of bee’s wax (make various products), when they are poured into the man-shaped mould the product will be in the human form. In the same way, the embryo produced from the aggregate attains the human form. It is observed that man is born of a man because of his belonging to the human species.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.17]]
As to the query that if a man is born of a man why the offsprings of the dull etc. are not similar to their parents it is said that in the seed (sperm or ovum), the part of the body which is damaged in it’s genetic source gets abnormality otherwise not. Hence both types of cases are observed. The sense organs of all are self-derived and their presence or absence is dependent on fate. Therefore, the offsprings of the dull etc. are not invariably similar to their parents.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.18]]
This is not a fact that the self is conscious in presence of sense organs otherwise not because the self is never dissociated with the psyche and from a particular psyche a particular knowledge is acquired.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.19]]
The agent can not proceed for knowledge and consequent action in absence of sense organs. The action which is dependent on certain entities do not exist without them such as the potter is helpless in his action, in spite of his knowledge, in absence of earth.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.20-21]]
Now hear the spiritual knowledge because the knowledge of the self is great one. After controlling his sense organs, concentrating his unstable mind, the knower of the self enters into the spiritual field and becomes stationed in his own knowledge. Thus with his concentrated knowledge everywhere, he examines all the entities.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.22-24]]
O Bharadwaja! hear another fact, one while asleep and having his sense organs, speech and activities stopped does not perceive the sense object nor does feel happiness or misery (but still he is conscious and) as such (only on non-perception of senses) he can not be treated as unconscious. No unified knowledge can flow without the knowledge of the self. There is no any independent entity nor is that causeless.

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.25]]
“Thus O Bharadwaja! the conscious, the source of origin, the self, the seer and the cause– all this has been explained with certainty. “Now remove your doubts.” *

[[cite: Sutrasthana 3.26-27]]
Summing up– The cause of origin, birth and growth, the views of Punarvasu and Bharadwaja refutation of preposition, and clear conclusion about self– all this is explained in the minor chapter on descent in embryo.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.3]]
(( All of the above is from Chapter 3 Sarirasthana pages 418-427 )) OM NAMAH GURU OM NAMAH SRI PUNARVASU ATREYA Development of the Fetus Sa 4 The factors from which the embryo is originated, definition of embryo, factors producing the embryo, the order of it’s development, the cause of development, factors hindering it’s birth, factors leading to it’s destruction in the womb and those causing morbidity though not fully destroying it- all this will be explained in this chapter.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.4]]
Embryo is originated by the aggregate of these entities- mother, father, self, suitability, nutrition and psyche. The different parts being originated from these factors as maternal, paternal etc. have already been said earlier.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.5]]
The combination of sperm, ovum and life-principle implanted in the womb is known as embryo.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.6]]
Embryo is the product of akasa, vayu, tejas, ap and prthvi being the seat of consciousness. Thus, embryo is the aggregate of the 5 mahabhutas being the seat of the consciousness which is regarded as the sixths constituent of embryo.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.7]]
(Now) the order in which the embryo is formed is explained. After the accumulated menstrual blood is discharged and the new one is situated, the woman having cleanly bathed and with undamaged genital passage, ovum and uterus is called as having opportune period. When the man having undamaged sperms cohabits with such a woman, his semen, the essence of all the sariradhatus, is extracted from the whole body impelled by orgasm. Thus being impelled by the self in the form of orgasm and also seated by him, the semen having potentiality of a seed, is ejaculated from the man’s body and through the proper track enters into the uterus and combines with the ovum.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.8]]
There, first of all the principle of consciousness comes forward alongwith psyche to receive the qualities (of mahabhtuas). He is hetu, karana, nimitta (cause), aksara (un-decaying), karat (doer), manta (thinker), vedita (perceptor), boddha (knower), drasta (seer), dharta (sustainer), brahma (creator), viswakarma (performing universal function), viswarupa (takgin universal forms), purusa (lying in the body), prabhava (source of origin), avyaya (undamagable), nitya (eternal), guni (having qualities), grahana (reciever), pradhana (principal), avyakta (unmanifest), jiva (life principle), Jna (conscious), pudgala (ego), cetanavan (having sensation), vibhu (omnipresent), bhutama (essence of creatures), indriyatma (essence of sense organs) and antaratma (inner essence). At the time of receiving the qualities, , he, first of all, takes up akasa. As the undecaying self with desire to create the beings at the end of the final destruction (of creation) creates, with the psyche as instrument, first of all, akasa thereafter gradually the other 4 elements vayu etc. having more manifest qualities. At the time of putting on the body also he takes up akasa itself first of all and then the other 4 elements vayu etc. with more manifest qualities gradually. The entire process of receiving the qualities (of mahabhutas by uniting with them) is completed within a subtle measure of time. [very brief/ slow].

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.9]]
Thus endowed with all the qualities while taking the form of embryo, during the first month it is completely mixed up and made turbid with all the constituents and like phlegm having unmanifest form and body parts both as manifest and un-manifest.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.10]]
During the second month, it is solidified as a small bolus, elongated muscle or tumor-like which indicate male, female and ‘enunch’ respectively.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.11]]
During the 3rd month, all the body parts are formed simultaneously.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.12]]
Some of the body parts have already been said earlier classified as maternal etc. Now these will be mentioned along with some other entities from the point of view of the products of the mahabhutas. In fact, the maternal etc. are also the products of the mahabhutas. Those derived from akasa are sound, the auditory organ, lightness, minuteness, distinction. Touch, the tactile organ, roughness, impulsion, shaping of dhatus and physical activities are derived from vayu. Those derived from tejas are vision, the visual organ, light, digestion and heat. Those derived from ap are taste, the gustatory organ, coldness, softness, unction and moistening. Those derived from prthvi are smell, olfactory organ, heaviness, stability and mass.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.13]]
Thus the person is equal to the universe. Whatever formed entities are found in the universe, they are also found in the person and vice versa. The learned people want to see the phenomena with this angle.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.14]]
Thus his sense organs and other body parts appear simultaneously except those entities which come forth after birth such as– teeth, secondary sex characters, manifestation of sex characters and other similar entities. This is the normal pattern, and otherwise is an abnormal pattern. In the fetus, some entities are permanent while others are temporary. His body parts which are manifested carry the features of female, male or enunch. The characteristic features of female and male depend on the self or the mahabhutas and are determined according to the dominance of one or the other factor such as– want of valor, timidity, lack of skill, confusion, instability, heaviness in lower parts, intolerance, laxity, tenderness, genetic factor for uterus and other similar entities determine the female sex, contrary to these determine the male sex, the characteristics of both types denote the ‘enunch’.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.15]]
The fetus attains the free flow of consciousness in his mind at the very time when the sense organs are manifested. Hence then onwards the fetus pulsates and expresses the desire for whatever is experienced in the previous life, this is called by the elders as the state of two hearts. His heart which is maternally derived gets connected with the mother’s heart through vessels carrying nutrition. Hence their desire is transmitted through them. Due to this reason it is not desirable to ignore the (desires of) fetus expressed through the mother. In case the same are ignored, there may be destruction or morbidity (in the fetus). At this stage, the mother becomes equal to the fetus for acquisition and maintenance in respect of certain things. Therefore, the wise manage the pregnant lady with liked and wholesome things.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.16]]
Now I shall mention, in brief, the signs and symptoms of pregnancy and the state of 2 hearts. The management depends on knowledge which, in turn, depends on signs and symptoms, hence description of signs and symptoms is necessary; such as– disappearance of menstruation, excessive salivation, loss of desire for food, vomiting, anorexia, liking for sour things, inclination towards good or bad things, heaviness in body, malaise in eyes, appearance of milk in breasts, excessive blackness in lips and the areola of breasts, slight edema in feet, appearance of the line of small hairs, dilatation of vagina– these are the symptoms of pregnancy.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.17]]
Whatever she wants should be provided to her except those which damage the fetus.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.18]]
These are the factors which damage the fetus such as– all food articles which are very heavy, hot and irritant as well as severe activities. The elders also advise like this– she should not wear red clothes in order to prevent the (attacks of) gods, demons and their followers, she should not take intoxicating wines, ride on vehicles, eat meat, should abstain completely from the things which are unfavorable to all the sense organs and such others which (elderly) women know (and advise).

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.19]]
In case the desire is too intense, even the unwholesome thing may be given to her added with the wholesome one with a view to satisfying her desire. Suppression of the desire, V gets vitiated and moving inside the body causes destruction or deformity in the ensuing fetus.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.20]]
During the 4th month, the fetus attains stability and as such the pregnant woman feels particular heaviness in the body.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.21]]
During the 5th month, in fetus flesh and blood are developed more in comparison to other months, hence the pregnant woman gets particularly lean and thin.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.22]]
During the 6th month, the fetus is developed more in respect of strength and complexion, hence the pregnant woman particularly loses strength and complexion during this period.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.23]]
During the 7th month, the fetus is developed in respect of all entities, hence the pregnant woman become overall exhausted during the period.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.24]]
During the 8th month, the fetus and mother exchange ojas mutually now and again through nutrient-carrying vessels because of the immaturity of the fetus. Hence during the period the pregnant woman sometimes becomes exhilarated and sometimes depressed, similarly the fetus. So then the delivery of the fetus [in this month; prematurely] is entailed with calamity due to instability of ojas. Looking to this, the experts treat the 8th month as ‘unreckonable’.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.25]]
On expiry of even one day (after the 8th month), the 9th month till the 10th month is said as the period of parturition. This is the limit of this period, overstay of the fetus in the womb is abnormal.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.26]]
Thus the fetus grows and develops in this order in the womb.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.27]]
The fetus develops in the womb due to the excellence of the procreative factors– mother etc., excellence of mother’s conduct, proper mechanism of ‘upasneha (nourishment) and upasweda (heating)’ from the mother, passage of time and natural phenomena.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.28]]
The defects in the procreative factors- mother etc. lead to the absence of birth of the child.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.29]]
The factors contrary to those responsible for the development of the fetus as said above cause it’s destruction in the womb or premature delivery.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.30]]
Now I will explain how the factors, though not destroying completely, cause morbidity in fetus. When a woman uses aggravating factors, the doshas get vitiated and in course of spreading reach the ovum and uterus but do not affect them entirely. She conceives but the fetus gets damaged in one or more maternally derived organs; that part is affected with morbidity in the gene, wholly or partially, of which the doshas are vitiated. When in it’s ovum the gene concerned with uterus is damaged, the progeny becomes sterile; when a part of this gene is affected, a putrefied child is born. When alongwith the latter abnormality a portion of the genes concerning the female characters relating to body is also affected, the progeny will be predominantly female-shaped, but not female actually. This person/ condition is called ‘varta’. These are the morbidities due to affection of the female genes.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.31]]
Likwise, when the genetic part of the sperm in male is affected, the child will be sterile. When a fraction of the genetic part is affected, putrefied child will be born. When alongwith the latter morbidity, a fraction of the genetic part relating to male body characters, the offspring will be predominantly male-shaped but not male actually and named as ‘Trnaputrika’. These are the genetic defects concerning male.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.32]]
Thus by the above description of the morbidity relating to maternally and paternally derived organs, that relating to the organs derived from suitability, nutrition and psyche may also be taken as having been described.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.33]]
The absolute self is devoid of abnormality and characters in all beings, hence the characters are found only due to specific features of psyche and body.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.34]]
There are 3 doshas in body– V, P and K. They affect the body. Two are the doshas in psyche– rajas and tamas. ...

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.41]]
[Here follows information on pages 435-439 about different types of minds/ personalities.] [It probably does need to be copied into the book, but check book I to make sure.] [affirmative; it will be added to ‘mind’ chapter] Thus the entire topic of the descent of the life principle into embryo is explained as proposed earlier. The full knowledge of this topic leads to observance of the entities which are conducive to fetus and elimination of those which are liable to damage it.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 4.42-45]]
Now the summing up verses– 5 useful topics– cause, self, source of origin, gradual development of fetus in the womb and it’s cause, the damaging factors and the cause leading to the absence of birth , destruction and morbidity– all this is said in this major chapter on descent into embryo. The former 5 and the latter 3 are called as auspicious and unauspicious factors respectively. The physician who knows fully all these 8 entities is able to work for the king. He, with broad intelligence, should know the means of formation of the fetus and also the factors which damage the same.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.20]]
(( All of the above is from Chapter 4 Sarirasthana pages 428-435, + p.439 )) OM NAMAH GURU [The following is from a couple of pages on the Fetus.] Sa 6 Agnivesha said– I heard whatever you said about the body. (Further kindly enlighten us as to) what part of the fetus arises first in the womb? How does it lie inside the womb and whither faced? On what food is it sustained? In what state does it come out? By what food and management does it die immediately after birth? By what does it grow being free from disorders? Whether it is affected by the disorders caused by wrath of gods etc? What is your view about the existence or non-existence of timely and untimely death? What is it’s maximum life-span? What are the factors leading to maximum life-span?

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.21]]
After Agnivesa finished his queries, Lord Punarvasu said– it has already been said in the chapter on the descent into embryo as to how it arises in the womb and what organs appear and when? (Regarding your first query) There are various types of controversy among the sages who composed the aphorisms. Now understand what I tell you. “In the womb, head manifests first”- This is the view of Kumarasira Bharadwaja because that is the seat of all the sense organs. Kankayana, the physician from Bahlika, says– ‘Heart (arises first) because it is the passage for ingestion of nutrition. Bhadrasaunaka said– ‘Ano-rectum arise first because they are instruments of the person. Janaka from Videha said– ‘sense organs (arise first) because they are the seat on knowledge. Marici Kawyapa said- ‘it is incomprehensible because of it’s being out of direct observation. Dhanwantari said– ‘all organs appear simultaneously. The view of Dhanvantari is correct because all organs such as heart etc. appear simultaneously. All organs of the fetus are rooted in the heart and also some other entities are located there, there can be no appearance of other entities earlier than heart so simultaneous appearance of all organs preceded by heart is concluded. All entities, in fact, are inter-linked so they should be viewed with correct perspective.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.22]]
The fetus lies in the womb facing towards the mother’s back, with head upwards and limbs folded.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.23]]
The fetus, without hunger and thirst, depends for it’s maintenance entirely on mother by the mechanism of unction and heating in the uterus during the stage of incomplete manifestation. Thereafter some unction is performed through the passage of hair follicles and partially through the path of umbilical cord. The cord is attached to the umbilicus, placenta is attached to the cord on one side and to the mother’s heart on the other. Mother’s heart floods the placenta (with nutritive fluid) through the pulsating blood vessels. That nutrition provides strength and complexion as it contains all essential factors. IN pregnant woman, nutrition takes 3 courses– first for the nourishment of her own body, the second for lactation and the third for the growth of the fetus. Sustained by that nutrition, it carries on within the womb (dependent on the mother).

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.24]]
The fetus, when the moment of delivery is approached, by taking turn becomes below-headed and comes out of the genital track. This is normal, otherwise is abnormal. Hence-forth he becomes independent for his maintenance.

[[cite: Sharirasthana 6.26]]
His diet and management as mentioned in the chapter in the ‘principles of procreation’ prevent disorders and promote the growth of fetus. If these two are not properly observed the offspring dies immediately after birth as the newly planted tree with it’s root un-stabilized is destroyed by the wind and the sun.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.229-231]]
(( All of the above is from Chapter 6 Sarirasthana pages 451-452 )) [Nursing] TREATMENT FOR AILMENTS OF THE BREASTS AND BREAST-MILK Ci 30 “Earlier, the features of excellence of breasts an breast-milk of wet nurse, galactogogue and galactodepurant measures, symptoms of breast milk affected by the doshas, treatment of the diminished one and it’s 8 defects– all these have been said. The best among physicians having scholarly vision should know them as included in V etc. but as there are 3 types of disciples, I am (again) describing it in detail.”

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.232-235]]
General causes of the 8 Types of Defects of [Breast-Milk]: Due to– eating during indigestion, eating unsuitable and incompatible items, irregularly and excessively; regular intake of salty, sour, pungent, alkaline and decomposed food items; mental and physical stress, vigil in nights, mental work, suppression of impelled urges and propulsion of unimpelled ones; day-sleep after eating rice cooked with pulse, slowly formed curd, channel- blocking items and meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals, indulgence in wine, lack of physical exercise, injury, anger and reduction caused by illness,-- dosas reaching the milk carrying vessels and affecting milk produce 8 types of defects.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.236]]
Symptoms of V-deranged Breast-milk: There is abnormal taste, excessive froth and roughness.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.237]]
Symptoms of P-deranged Breast-milk: There is abnormal color and foul smell.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.237]]
Symptoms of K-deranged Breast-milk: There is unctuousness, sliminess and heaviness.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.239-241]]
3 Ways V Can Derange Breast-Milk: V vitiated by it’s vitiating factors such as intake of rough food etc. reaches the seat of milk (breast) and affects the taste of milk. So the milk affected with V has abnormal taste. The child gets reduced while taking it, does not relish it and grows slowly. Similarly the vitiated V churning the milk inside produces excessive froth and as such the breast milk flows out with difficulty. By taking it the child suffers from feebleness of voice, retention of stool, urine and wind, or V head disorder or coryza.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.242]]
V vitiated as above, dries up the unctuousness of the milk. Thus the child by taking the rough milk gets debilitated.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.243-244]]
2 Ways P Can Derange Breast-milk: P vitiated by intake of hot etc. reaches the seat of milk [the breast] and produces abnormal color therin [of the breast only/ of the breast and milk/ of the milk only] such as blue, yellow, black etc. The child suffers from abnormal complexion, perspiration, thirst, diarrhea and constant fever and does not welcome the breast.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.245]]
Due to P vitiated as above, the milk gets foul odor and the child taking it is affected by anemia and jaundice.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.246-250]]
3 Ways K Can Derange Breast-milk: K vitiated by intake of heavy etc. while reaching the seat of milk makes the milk too unctuous due to unctuous nature. By this the child suffers from vomiting, tenesmus, and salivation. Due, in this same condition, to the channels being constantly smeared, it is associated with sleep and exhaustion, dyspnea and cough and excessive discharge and feeling of darkness. When K predominates and makes the breast milk slimy, the child taking it suffers from salivation, swelling of face and eyes and dullness. K, due to heaviness while reaching the seat of milk causes heaviness in milk. By taking such milk the child gets heart disease.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.251]]
Other Disorders: Other various respective disorders arise in the breast milk affected by the doshas located in the seat of milk.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.252-256]]
Treatment of Disorders of Breast-milk: General Treatment of Disorders of Breast-milk: In such cases, in order to purify the breast milk, first of all, the wet-nurse should be uncted and fomented properly and then treated with emesis. For this, she should be administered the decoction of nimba and patola salted and added with the paste of vaca, priyangu, madhuyasti, madanaphala, kutaja and sarsapa. When vomited well, she should be given diet as prescribed and thereafter, considering morbidity, time and strength, she should be purged after having been uncted. For this, she should be given trivrt or haritaki mixed with decoction of triphala or simply haritaki mixed with honey. When purged well she should be given proper dietetic regimen and then, for removing the remnant dosa, suitable food and drinks.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.257-259]]
Food to Be Used: Cereals of sali and sastika rice, syamaka, priyangu, kodrava, barley and seeds of bamboo and cane processed with some uncting substance are beneficial. “For vegetarian soup, green gram, lentils and horse gram are useful, soups should be prepared with tender leaves of nimba and vetra, kulaka, vartaka and amalaka added with triaktu and rock salt. It [rock salt/ the previous soup/ all the foods listed] purifies breast milk.” For non-vegetarians, meat of rabbits, grey partridge and deer should be given after processing them well.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.260]]
Specific Formulas For Treatment of Disorders of Breast-milk: The following decoction should be administered [[as a beverage]] for purifying breast- milk: Sarngesta, saptaparna bark and aswagandha + water Boil the above together.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.261]]
The following decoction should be administered [[as a beverage]] for purifying breast- milk: rohini + water Boil the above together.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.262]]
The following decoction should be administered for purifying breast-milk: guduci, saptaparna bark Decoct with water.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.263]]
The following decoction should be administered for purifying breast-milk: Sunthi Decoct the above with water.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.264]]
The following decoction should be administered for purifying breast-milk: kiratatikta Decoct the above with water.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.267-269]]
“This is the general treatment of the defects of breast milk. Now listen about the other measures.” : Treatment for breast milk of abnormal taste: The woman should be given to drink draksa, madhuka, sariva and payasya after they are pounded finely and dissolved in warm water. At the same time, the paste of pancakola and kulattha should be applied locally on breasts and when dried should be washed. Then milk should be taken out. Thus milk gets purified.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.270]]
Treatment of breast milk which is excessively frothy: The woman should be given a paste of patha, sunthi, sarngesta and murva with warm water.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.271]]
Besides, for purifying breast-milk, paste of anjana, sunthi, devadaru, bilva root and priyangu should be applied on breasts as above.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.272]]
[General Treatment/trtmnt of frothy milk]: One should prescribe for the wet-nurse the decoction of kiratatikta, sunthi and guduci to alleviate the defects of breast-milk. The breasts should also be applied with the paste of barley, wheat and mustard.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.273]]
Treatment for rough milk: The woman should take milk or ghee processed with galactodepurant drugs mentioned in the chapter on 600 evacuatives (Su.4). As above, the warm paste of jivakadi pancamula (Ci. 1.1.44) should be applied on the breasts. It purifies breast milk.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.274]]
Treatment to Remove Abnormal Color from Breast-milk: The woman should take the paste of yastimadhu, mrdvika, payasya and sindhuvarika with cold water. Paste of draksa and madhuka should be applied on breasts and after it is dried the milk should be taken out.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.275-276]]
Treatment of milk with foul odor: She should take the paste of visanika ajasrngi, triphala, haridra and vaca with cold water. Or the wet-nurse should take powder of haritaki and trikatu with honey, keeping on wholesome diet. The paste of sariva, usira, manjistha, slesmataka, kucandana or patra, gribera, candana and usira should be applied on the breasts.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.277]]
Treatment of Unctuous breast-milk: This can be purified shortly by taking the paste of devadaru, musta and patha added with rock salt with warm water.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.278]]
Treatment of Slimy breast-milk: She should take the decoction of sarngesta, haritaki, vaca, musta, sunthi and patha which purify the milk. She should also take takrarista mentioned as remedy for piles. She should also apply the paste of vidari, bilva and madhuka on the breasts.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.279-280]]
Treatment of Heavy breast-milk: She should take decoction of trayamana, guduci, nimba, patola and triphala to remove the impurities of the breast milk. Or she should take (decoction of) pippalimula, cavya, citraka and sunthi. The breasts should be pasted with bala, sunthi sarngesta and murva. Or the breasts should be pasted with prsniparni and payasya.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.281]]
“Thus these 8 defects of breast-milk have been said with their etiology, characters and treatment. Besides, disorders caused by the defects of milk have also been said.”

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.282]]
PEDIATRICS Similarity Between Disease in Adults in Children: Dosas, dusyas and malas and also the disorders which are in adults are entirely the same in children.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.282]]
Difference Between Disease in Adults in Children: The only difference is that their quantity is less.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.283]]
Contraindication of Emesis etc. ([P.K.] for Children: Emesis etc. [p.k.] are avoided in children looking to their delicacy, dependence on others and incapability in respect of speech and movements.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.284]]
Dosage for Children: The learned physician should administer drugs to children in smaller dose according to disease.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.285]]
Tastes/ Medicines to Emphasize in Treatment of Children: Drugs should be “mostly sweet, astringent, with latex and soft ones cautiously.”

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.286]]
Drug Contraindicated for Children: Excessively unctuous, rough, hot, sour, pungent in vipaka and heavy quality drugs and foods.

[[cite: Chikitsasthana 30.287]]
“Thus treatment of all diseases of children have been mentioned in brief which should be applied by the learned physician after due consideration.”
